I was watching you out there, before. I've never seen you look so ****.
You're 18, you don't know what you want. And you won't know what you want 'til you're 45, and even if you get it, you'll be too old to use it.
Ooh, see that, there. Who needs affection when I have blind hatred?
Just 'cause you're beautiful, that doesn't mean that you can treat people like they don't matter.
You're asking me out? That's so cute! What's your name again?
Leave it to you to use big words when you're smashed.
And I'm BACK IN THE GAME!
I guess in this society, being male and an ******* makes you worthy of our time.
I have a **** on my face, don't I?
You embarrassed the girl. Sacrifice yourself on the alter of dignity and even the score.
You're not as vile as I thought you were.
It's not everyday you find a girl who'll flash someone to get you out of detention.
Watching that ***** violate my car doesn't count as a date.
Oh wait... was that... did your hairline just recede?
Remove head from sphincter, then drive!
Of all the words my father wrote - and there were many - I remember these the most: "Nothing that results from human progress is achieved with unanimous consent. And those who are enlightened before the others are condemned to persue that light in spite of others."
I can kill you - I'm insane.
I love America. No one is responsible for what they do.
Welcome to Voiceprint Identification. When you see the red light go on, would you please state in the following order: your destination, your nationality, and your full name; surname first, Christian name and initial.
Starlight; star bright, first star I've seen tonight, I wish I may; I wish I might, Have this wish I wish tonight
Oh, he's a lover, man... definitely loves what he does for a living.
I didn't mean to hurt you, Lou. But if you'd have shot me, you'd be moppin' up my blood now.
Where are John, Joe, Jake, Jim, jerk? Dead, dead, dead! They were not born, before they were born, they were not born. Where are Leonardo, Rembrandt, Ludwig? Alive! Alive! Alive! They were born!
Walter has a clear mind. One day something will enter it, feel lonely... and leave again.
Ring rubber bells! Beat cotton gongs! Strike silken cymbals!
One thing I could never stand was to see a filthy, dirty old drunkie, howling away at the filthy songs of his fathers and going blurp blurp in between as it might be a filthy old orchestra in his stinking, rotten guts. I could never stand to see anyone like that, whatever his age might be, but more especially when he was real old like this one was.
She was very badly raped, you see! We were assaulted by a gang of vicious, young, hoodlums in this house! In this very room you are sitting in now! I was left a helpless cripple, but for her the agony was too great! The doctor said it was pneumonia; because it happened some months later! During a flu epidemic! The doctors told me it was pneumonia, but I knew what it was! A VICTIM OF THE MODERN AGE! Poor, poor girl!
I jumped, O my brothers, and I fell hard but I did not snuff it, oh no. if I had snuffed it, I would not be here to tell what I have told.
Appy-polly-loggies. I had something of a pain in the gulliver so had to sleep. I was not awakened when I gave orders for wakening.
Enjoying that are you my darlin'? Bit cold and pointless isn't it my lovely? What's happened to yours my little sister?
I've suffered the tortures of the ******, sir  - tortures of the ******.
Welly, welly, welly, welly, welly, welly, well. To what do I owe the extreme pleasure of this surprising visit?
Viddy well, little brother. Viddy well.
Well, like he says, it's mostly odd things he does. Helping like... here and there as it might be.
Pick that up and put it down properly!
Are you now, or have you ever been a homosexual?
What you got back home, little sister, to play your fuzzy warbles on? I bet you got little save pitiful, portable picnic players. Come with uncle and hear all proper! Hear angel trumpets and devil trombones. You are invited.
Hi, hi, hi there! At last we meet. Our brief govoreet through the letter-hole was not, shall we say, satisfactory, yes?
As we walked along the flatblock marina, I was calm on the outside, but thinking all the time - Now it was to be Georgie the general, saying what we should do and what not to do, and Dim as his mindless greeding bulldog. But suddenly, I viddied that thinking was for the gloopy ones, and that the oomny ones use like, inspiration and what Bog sends. Now it was lovely music that came into my aid. There was a window open with the stereo on, and I viddied right at once what to do.
It had been a wonderful evening and what I needed now, to give it the perfect ending, was a little of the Ludwig Van.
I woke up. The pain and sickness all over me like an animal. Then I realized what it was. The music coming up from the floor was our old friend, Ludwig Van, and the dreaded Ninth Symphony.
Shut your filthy hole, you scum!
Naughty, naughty, naughty! You filthy old soomka!
Excuse me, Mrs. Can you please help? There's been a terrible accident! My friend's in the middle of the road bleeding to death! Can I please use your telephone for an ambulance?
Eggiwegs! I would like... to smash them!
Ho, ho, ho! Well, if it isn't fat stinking billy goat Billy Boy in poison! How art thou, thou globby bottle of cheap, stinking chip oil? Come and get one in the yarbles, if ya have any yarbles, you eunuch jelly thou!
The Durango '95 purred away a real horrowshow - a nice, warm vibraty feeling all through your guttiwuts. And soon it was trees and dark, my brothers, with real country dark.
There was me, that is Alex, and my three droogs, that is Pete, Georgie, and Dim, and we sat in the Korova Milkbar trying to make up our rassoodocks what to do with the evening. The Korova milkbar sold milk-plus, milk plus vellocet or synthemesc or drencrom, which is what we were drinking. This would sharpen you up and make you ready for a bit of the old ultra-violence.
Suddenly, I viddied what I had to do, and what I had wanted to do, and that was to do myself in; to snuff it, to blast off for ever out of this wicked, cruel world. One moment of pain perhaps and, then, sleep for ever, and ever and ever.
"I strenuously object?" Is that how it works? Hm? "Objection." "Overruled." "Oh, no, no, no. No, I STRENUOUSLY object." "Oh. Well, if you strenuously object then I should take some time to reconsider."
We joined the Marines because we wanted to live our lives by a certain code, and we found it in the Corps. Now you're asking us to sign a piece of paper that says we have no honor. You're asking us to say we're not Marines. If a court decides that what we did was wrong, then I'll accept whatever punishment they give. But I believe I was right sir, I believe I did my job, and I will not dishonor myself, my unit, or the Corps so I can go home in six months... Sir.
Why does a Lieutenant Junior Grade with nine months' experience and a track record for plea bargaining get assigned to a murder case? Would it be so it never sees the inside of a courtroom?
Is the colonel's underwear a matter of national security?
You see Danny, I can deal with the bullets, and the bombs, and the blood. I don't want money, and I don't want medals. What I do want is for you to stand there in that faggoty white uniform and with your Harvard mouth extend me some ******* courtesy. You gotta ask me nicely.
Take caution in your tone, Commander. I'm a fair guy, but this ******* heat is making me absolutely crazy.
Oh, spare me the psychobabble father ********.
Oh, hah, I'm sorry, I keep forgetting. You were sick the day they taught law at law school.
So this is what a courtroom looks like.
What do you wanna discuss now? My favorite color?
Oh, now I see what you're saying. It had to be Professor Plum in the library with the candlestick.
Maybe, if we work at it, we can get Dawson charged with the Kennedy assassination.
Whatever happened to saluting an officer when he leaves the room?
You don't know what this means to me. If you hadn't come back it would have meant... the epilogue or the news... in Welsh... for life!
He's *** obsessed! The older generation's leading our nation in a state of galloping ruin!
God knows what you've unleashed on the unsuspecting South. It'll be wine, women, and song all the way with Ringo when he gets the taste for it.
He's very fussy about his drums, you know. They loom large in his legend.
Hey, you won't interfere with the basic rugged concept of me personality, will you madam?
I'm going out parading before it's too late!
There you go, hiding behind a smokescreen of bourgeois cliches.
Sorry we hurt your field, mister.
Get me a bottle of milk and some tranquilizers. I see it all now, it's a plot... a plot...
I now declare this bridge open!
One, two, Freddy's coming for you. / Three, four, better lock your door. / Five, six, grab your crucifix. / Seven, eight, gonna stay up late. / Nine, ten, never sleep again.
I'm going to punch out your ugly lights, whoever you are!
I don't know what's real anymore.
Guys can have nightmares too ya know. Ya ain't got a corner on the market or somethin'.
Maybe we're gonna have a big earthquake. They say things get really weird just before.
Tina, you either gotta cut your fingernails or ya gotta stop that kind of dreaming. One or the other.
Okay Krueger, we play in your court.
And now I lay me down to sleep, I pray the lord my soul to keep. And if I die before I wake, I pray the lord my soul to take.
Oh, God, I could be bounded in a nutshell, and count myself a king of infinite space, were it not that I have bad dreams.
Whatever you do don't fall asleep.
I'm your boyfriend now, Nancy.
Oh, man. Midnight. Baseball bats and boogeymen. Beautiful.
I probably could have saved her if I'd have moved sooner. But I thought it was just another nightmare, like the one I had the night before. There was... there was this guy; he had knives for fingers.
Nancy, you dreamed about the same creep I did.
You gotta believe in something, right?  I'm gonna be here when you wake up. You're gonna make it.
Ain't gonna dream no more, no more. Ain't gonna dream no more. All night long I sing this song. Ain't gonna dream no more.
Do you like my body, Joey?
If your only faith is science, doctor, it may be you that's laid to rest.
This is where he takes us.
Phillip, wake up... Have a nice stroll, *******.
Let's snuff the sucka.
Hi. Welcome to the snake pit.
In my dreams I can walk. My legs are strong. In my dreams I am the Wizard Master.
You stupid *****, you're killing us... YOU'RE KILLING US.
It's now or never. I'm not gonna kid you, this is as dangerous as it gets. If you die in this dream it's for real. Nobody has to go in that doesn't want to.
My God. You were his mother.
I wanna draw some blood!
You can check in, but you can't check out.
Welcome to Wonderland, Alice.
You shouldn't have buried me. I'm not dead.
This ain't my dreamland. Kristen! If you're here, I'm gonna pound your ***!
A true warrior needs no eyes.
If the food don't kill ya, the service will.
Ninja warriors have calm.  Find your balance, Rick!
You think you've got what it takes? I've been guarding my gate for a long time, *****.
Oh, hi, handsome. Care for some buns?
All the towns in America, and I gotta move to The Bermuda Triangle. That's great.
Joey! Kincaid! Help me!
How sweet. Fresh meat.
How's this for a wet dream?
All right, I'm gonna punch his ticket in.
Go ahead, Jesse. Try it on for size.
Fight him. You are not afraid of him! He doesn't even exist!
He can't fight me. I'm him.
Then what is it? Bird rabies? It's that cheap seed you been buying.
Schneider got wasted last night. He must have been working late. Some maniac sliced him up like a kielbasa, hacked him in the shower. Got bloody footprints all over the place.
If you want to play with animals, Mr. Walsh, join the circus.
Kill me, Lisa. Please kill me... I love you, Lisa.
Wake up, little girl.
Okay, I believe you. You've had some scary dreams okay?
Mommy? Why can't Jesse wake up like everybody else?
Why don't you shut up and let her talk? I mean two of us have died in the past two days. Does that just strike you as particularly normal?
... seven, eight, better stay awake. Nine, ten, he's back again.
All right, Krueger... this time it's for keeps!
Hey, Danny, better not dream and drive.
Nothing but the best for Greta!
Kids... always a disappointment.
Yee-haw! This boy feels the need for speed.
You know, Phillip, you have a ********* red, white and blue American right to eat cotton candy and ride roller coasters.
You're a ******* crazy man.
I need me a time machine with a loud radio to take me where I'm going.
Sy Ableman was a serious man.
I feel like the carpet's been yanked out from under me.
I don't want Santana Abraxis! I've just been in a terrible auto accident!
Our love is like the wind... I can't see it, but I sure can feel it.
All I know is... you're beautiful.
This maniac should be wearing a number, not a badge.
This person, they... they go in the front door, then they go out a window and down a rope in the middle of the night?  If I could do something like that, I'd be the star of my A.A.R.P. meetings.
Your life could be a whole lot simpler if you could learn to operate a VCR.
Do you know what it's like to be the only kid in the first grade who got to talk about visiting day?
Kate, he's on the run and he's scared. And he's right to be scared, 'cause he's gonna get caught. You don't know the heat on this.
Remember, tomorrow is promised to no one.
I'm your substitute driver tonight, Mr. Sullivan.
You work with your hands, don't you?
I'd been married to my Rebecca for forty-seven years. When she died, I decided I never wanted that pain again. One thing I knew about Christy, she was going to outlive me.
Miss Russell, I should've called the police that night but I was weak. You convinced me to stay silent. I regret that. Know this: every time I see your face, I wanna rip your throat out.
So, do you want my signed confession now, or after coffee?
Warning. Assholes are closer than they appear.
Your gun is digging into my hip.
Be careful with that phone, Lieutenant. In time you could develop a tumour.
If I'm not back in five minutes... just wait longer.
It was all that Dan Marino's fault, everyone knows that. If he had held the ball, laces out, like he was supposed to, Ray would never have missed that kick. Dan Marino should die of gonorrhea and rot in ****. Would you like a cookie, son?
I need some refreshments, Dan. Would you like some refreshments, Dan? I'll be right back, Dan.
Hey Ventura, Ventura. Make any good collars lately, or were they leashes.
Who let Dr. Dolittle in?
That was a close one ladies and gentleman. Unfortunately in every contest, there must be a loser. Loo-hoo-ser-her.
Uh oh, I think I heard a toilet flush. Maybe somebody lost a turtle.
Pet Detective:  Howdy Lurch. Ace Ventura, Pet Detective.
Oh there is just one more thing Lieutenant...
See her? I ****** her up the ***.
Look, I'll tell you a story, all right? I once feel deeply, you know, profoundly in love with tropical fish. Had 60 goddamn fish tanks in my house. I skin dived to find just the right ones. Anisotremus virginicus, Holdacanthus ciliaris, Chaetodon capistratus. You name it. Then one day I say, "**** fish". I renounce fish. I vow never to set foot in that ocean again. That's how much "**** fish".
I suppose I do have one unembarrassed passion. I want to know what it feels like to care about something passionately.
Okay, well here's the twist. We find out that, that the killer really suffers from multiple personality disorder, right? See, he's actually really the cop and the girl. All of them are him. Isn't that ****** up?
John Leroche is a tall guy, skinny as a stick, pale eyes, slouch-shouldered, sharply handsome, despite the fact he's missing all his front teeth.
I'd **** her up the ***!
There are too many ideas and things and people. Too many directions to go. I was starting to believe the reason it matters to care passionately about something, is that it whittles the world down to a more manageable size.
You and I share the same DNA. Is there anything more lonely than that?
You will say that I should have known terrible things were about to happen. You will say that I was responsible. But even so, what could I have done by then? Wade lived on the edge of his emotions. He was always first to receive the brunt of our father's anger. He had no perspective to retreat to, even in a crisis.
This is the story of my older brother's strange criminal behaviour and disappearance. We who loved him no longer speak of Wade. It's as if he never existed.
Not a goddamn one of you is worth a hair on that good woman's head!
I've got sons, goddamn it! By God have I got sons!
I think there's some dirty business going on in this town.
Christ Sally! You are such a good person. Capital G! By God you are... you are so much better than I am. I am no goddamn good at all. And you... you are truly a good person. Like a ******* saint!
You know I get the feeling like a whipped dog some days. Some night I'm gonna bite back, I swear!
You know she won't be here for a half hour. You think you can stand it here that long?
That's what I love about this small town. Everyone knows everyone.
The male deposits his seed, and moves on. Probably to a younger, more desirable female. One who doesn't have any issues, whatever that means.
As much as God loves you
I don't know the meaning behind the song she sang. Perhaps it was a song of seduction, and the father was a field hand. Perhaps the song was simply a lullaby she remembered from many years ago, and the father was hope, and love, and desire and a belief in miracles. I want to believe that she was blessed. And I do miss her. And I hope she's left something; some little part of herself with me. That would be miracle enough, wouldn't it?
As much as Mother Miriam loves me?
Liberty Two Four is changing call signs - Liberty Two Four is now Air Force One!
. No matter what happens, we land this aircraft is that understood?
Mr. President, welcome aboard, sir!
How the **** did they get Air Force One?
The oil pressure. I forgot to check the oil pressure! When Kramer hears about this, the shit's going to hit the fan!
I know but this guy has no flying experience at all. He's a menace to himself and everything else in the air... yes, birds too.
Joey, have you ever been in a... in a Turkish prison?
Shanna, they bought their tickets, they knew what they were getting into. I say, let 'em crash.
I just want to tell you both good luck. We're all counting on you.
The tower, the tower! Rapunzel, Rapunzel!
Where did you get that dress, it's awful, and those shoes and that coat, jeeeeez!
He's all over the place! Nine hundred feet up to 1300 feet. What an *******!
I haven't felt this awful since we saw that Ronald Reagan film.
No, we can't do that, the risk of a flame-out is too great. Keep 'em at 24,000. No, feet.
No wonder you're upset. She's lovely. And a darling figure... supple, pouting *******... firm thighs. It's a shame you two don't get along.
Well, I'll give him another twenty minutes, but that's it!
The life of everyone on board depends upon just one thing: finding someone back there who can not only fly this plane, but who didn't have fish for dinner.
Extremely serious. It starts with a slight fever and dryness of the throat. When the virus penetrates the red blood cells, the victim becomes dizzy, begins to experience an itchy rash, then the poison goes to work on the central nervous system, severe muscle spasms followed by the inevitable grueling.  At this point, the entire digestive system collapses accompanied by uncontrollable flatulence  Until finally, the poor ******* is reduced to a quivering wasted piece of jelly.
I'm gonna go get Ted, just don't fall apart on me now!
We just keep running into each other, don't we, street rat?
You know Al, I'm getting really -  I don't think you're him.
Oooooh, nice shot, Jafa-
You've heard of the golden rule, haven't you? Whoever has the gold makes the rules.
Who disturbs my slumber?
Ladies and gentlemen, a warm Agrabah welcome for Sorceror Jafar!
Look at that, Abu. It's not everyday you see a horse with two rear ends.
You're speechless, I see. A fine quality in a wife.
I don't know where she gets it from. Her mother wasn't nearly so picky.
Don King talks black, lives white and thinks green.
Float like a butterfly, sting like a bee His hands can't hit what his eyes can't see.
What's my name? What's my name, ************!
I ain't draft dodging. I ain't burning no flag. I ain't running to Canada. I'm staying right here. You want to send me to jail? Fine, you go right ahead. I've been in jail for 400 years. I could be there for 4 or 5 more, but I ain't going no 10,000 miles to help murder and kill other poor people. If I want to die, I'll die right here, right now, fightin' you, if I want to die. You my enemy, not no Chinese, no Vietcong, no Japanese. You my opposer when I want freedom. You my opposer when I want justice. You my opposer when I want equality. Want me to go somewhere and fight for you? You won't even stand up for me right here in America, for my rights and my religious beliefs. You won't even stand up for my right here at home.
I'm the only normal one left around here. I'm a black Jew, I'm half drunk and I cant read.
Ain't no Vietcong ever called me ******.
You look like the heavyweight champion of pimps.
I'm gonna give 1000 dollars to the man who brings me Howard Cosell's toupee, dead or alive.
I found it. Just short of Zeta II Reticuli. We haven't reached the Outer Rim yet.
This is commercial towing vehicle Nostromo out of the Solomons, registration number 1-8-0-niner-2-4-6-0-niner. Calling Antarctica traffic control. Do you read me? Over.
Your mother mates out of season.
If the drug is here, we must destroy it!
It is like your name... Sykes. I'm sure it doesn't bother you at all that it sounds like "ss'ai k'ss," two words in my language which mean "excrement" and "cranium."  Shithead.
Father's dead, *******. Intruder on level one. All aliens, please proceed to level one.
You are... a beautiful, beautiful, butterfly.
She is severely fuckable, ain't she?
Don't push me, little Call. You hang with us for a while, you'll find out I am not the man with whom to ****!
Don't ever touch me!  Ever!
You're a thing, a construct. They grew you in a ******* lab.
My mommy always said there were no monsters. No real ones. But there are.
Hey Christie, do me a favour. When we hit the surface on the other side, no backstroke, okay!
We'd better get back, 'cause it'll be dark soon, and they mostly come at night... mostly.
Hey, maybe you haven't been keeping up on current events, but we just got our asses kicked, pal!
In nineteen minutes, this area's gonna be a cloud of vapor the size of Nebraska.
You always were an *******, Gorman!
Maybe we got 'em demoralized.
Outstanding. Now all we need is a deck of cards.
You know, Burke, I don't know which species is worse. You don't see them ******* each other over for a goddamn percentage.
Hey, Hicks. Man, you look just like I feel.
Bio-readouts are all in the green, looks like she's alive. Well, there goes our salvage, guys.
"Surgically removed before embryo implantation. Subject: Marachek, John J., died during the procedure." They killed him taking it off.
Stop your grinnin' and drop your linen!
I guess she don't like the cornbread, either.
Hudson, run a bypass.
This beats all records for running, standing or jumping gall.
What a story! Everything but the bloodhounds snappin' at her rear end.
There never was, and there never will be, another like you.
Peace and quiet is for libraries!
Nice speech, Eve. But I wouldn't worry too much about your heart. You can always put that award where your heart ought to be.
The bed looks like a dead animal act.
That I should want you at all suddenly strikes me as the height of improbability. But that in itself is probably the reason: You're an improbable person, Eve, and so am I. We have that in common. Also our contempt for humanity and inability to love and be loved, insatiable ambition, and talent. We deserve each other.
Fasten your seatbelts, it's going to be a bumpy night!
Too bad, we're gonna miss the third act. They're gonna play it offstage.
Margo Channing is a star of the theater. She made her first stage appearance at the age of four in Midsummer Night's Dream. She played a fairy and entered, quite unexpectedly, stark naked. She has been a star ever since. Margo is a great star, a true star. She never was or will be anything less or anything else.
Heaven help me. I love a psychotic!
The atmosphere is very MacBeth-ish... what has, or is about to, happen?
Where is Princess... fire and music?
There are very few moments in life as good as this. Let's remember it. To each of us and all of us, never have we been more close, may we never be farther apart.
Why do they always look like unhappy rabbits?
I detest cheap sentiment.
The minor awards, as you can see, have already been presented. Minor awards are for such as the writer and director, since their function is merely to construct a tower so that the world can applaud a light which flashes on top of it. And no brighter light has ever dazzled the eye than Eve Harrington.
We all come into this world with our little egos equipped with individual horns. If we don't blow them, who else will?
Don't cry. Just score it as an incomplete forward pass.
Funny business, a woman's career - the things you drop on your way up the ladder so you can move faster. You forget you'll need them again when you get back to being a woman. That's one career all females have in common, whether we like it or not: being a woman. Sooner or later, we've got to work at it, no matter how many other careers we've had or wanted. And in the last analysis, nothing's any good unless you can look up just before dinner or turn around in bed, and there he is. Without that, you're not a woman. You're something with a French provincial office or a book full of clippings, but you're not a woman. Slow curtain, the end.
Let the rest of the world beat their brains out for a buck. It's friends that count. And I got friends.
We all have abnormalities in common. We're a breed apart from the rest of humanity, we theatre folk. We are the original displaced personalities.
You're maudlin and full of self-pity. You're magnificent!
Where were we going that night, Lloyd and I? Funny, the things you remember and the things you don't.
Lloyd, honey, be a playwright with guts. Write me one about a nice normal woman who just shoots her husband.
You're not much of a bargain, you know. You're conceited and thoughtless and messy.
Real diamonds in a wig, the world we live in.
You be the host. It's your party. Happy birthday, welcome home, and we who are about to die salute you.
And you, I take it, are the Paderewski who plays his concerto on me, the piano?
Bill's thirty-two. He looks thirty-two. He looked it five years ago, he'll look it twenty years from now. I hate men.
I'll never forget this night as long as I live, and I'll never forget you for making it possible.
Those of you who do not read, attend the theater, listen to unsponsored radio programs, or know anything of the world in which you live, it is perhaps necessary to introduce myself. My name is Addison DeWitt. My native habitat is the theater. In it, I toil not, neither do I spin. I am a critic and commentator. I am essential to the theater.
It could have been - whole world - Willie Stark.
Anne, Burden's Landing is a place on the Moon. It isn't real. It doesn't exist. It's me pretending to live on what I earn. It's my mother trying to keep herself young and drinking herself old. It's you and Adam living in this house as though your father were still alive. It's an old man like the judge dreaming of the past.
Now, shut up! Shut up, all of you! Now listen to me, you hicks. Yeah, you're hicks too, and they fooled you a thousand times like they fooled me. But this time, I'm going to fool somebody. I'm going to stay in this race. I'm on my own and I'm out for blood.
I'm the hick they were gonna use to split the hick vote. But I'm standing right here now on my hind legs! Even a dog can learn to do that. Are you standing on your hind legs? Have you learned to do that yet?
They tried to ruin me, but they are ruined. They tried to ruin me because they didn't like what I have done. Do you like what I've done?
He'll ditch everybody in the whole world, because that's what Willie wants. Nobody in the world but him!
Remember, it is not I who have won, but you. Your will is my strength, and your need is my justice, and I shall live in your right and your will. And if any man tries to stop me from fulfilling that right and that will, I'll break him. I'll break him with my bare hands, for I have the strength of many.
I'm going to run. You can't stop me. I'm going to run even if I don't get a single vote!
You throw money around like it was money.
You wanna know what my platform is? Here it is. I'm gonna soak the fat boys and spread it out thin.
Now hold it, hold it. We're about to accuse Haldeman, who only happens to be the second most important man in this country, of conducting a criminal conspiracy from inside the White House. It would be nice if we were right.
All non-denial denials. They doubt our ancestry, but they don't say the story isn't accurate.
Listen... I'm tired of your chickenshit games! I don't want hints... I need to know what you know.
Please don't give him any more acid.
Look at this: an entire generation of Cinderellas and there's no glass slipper.
Adolescence is a marketing tool.
I never said I was a golden god... or did I?
When and where does this "real world" occur?
We are not Groupies. Groupies sleep with rockstars because they want to be near someone famous. We are here because of the music, we inspire the music. We are Band Aids.
She Changed everything. She was the one that said "No more ***. No more exploiting our bodies and hearts." Just blow-jobs, and that's it!
Your looks have become a problem!
You said we were going to go to Morocco. There is no Morocco. There's never been a Morocco. There's not even a Penny Lane. I don't even know your real name.
Can you believe these new girls? None of them use birth control and they eat all the steak!
Don't worry, no one's getting hurt here. She knows Leslie's coming to New York tomorrow. This is the circus, everybody's trying not to go home. Stop looking at me like that.
He was never a person, he was a journalist!
Just think, any other city in the world and you'd still be a virgin.
Does anybody remember laughter?
A Mo-Jo, it's a very high-tech machine that transmits pages over the telephone! It only takes eighteen minutes a page!
Listen to Tommy with a candle burning, and you'll see your entire future.
Look - you should be happy for me. You don't know what he says to me in private. Maybe it is love - as much as it can be...
Doris is the soul of this band!
"That groupie"? She was a Band-Aid! All she did was love your band. And you used her, all of you! You used her and threw her away! She almost died last night while you were with Bob Dylan. You guys, you're always talking about the fans, the fans, the fans; she was your biggest fan, and you threw her away! And if you can't see that, that's your biggest problem. And I love her! I love her!
I'm never as good as when you're there.
I thought you were dead, *******.
This doesn't make any sense.
That was not Mozart laughing, Father... that was God.
They're all so beautiful. Why don't I have three heads?
From now on we are enemies, You and I. Because You choose for Your instrument a boastful, lustful, smutty, infantile boy and give me for reward only the ability to recognize the incarnation. Because You are unjust, unfair, unkind, I will block You, I swear it. I will hinder and harm Your creature on earth as far as I am able.
Mediocrities everywhere... I absolve you... I absolve you... I absolve you... I absolve you... I absolve you all.
My music... they started without me!
What's so intelligent about writing a Requiem Mass?
While my father prayed earnestly to God to protect commerce, I would offer up secretly the proudest prayer a boy could think of: Lord, make me a great composer. Let me celebrate Your glory through music and be celebrated myself. Make me famous through the world, dear God. Make me immortal. After I die, let people speak my name forever with love for what I wrote. In return, I will give You my chastity, my industry, my deepest humility, every hour of my life, Amen.
All I wanted was to sing to God. He gave me that longing... and then made me mute. Why? Tell me that. If He didn't want me to praise him with music, why implant the desire? Like a lust in my body! And then deny me the talent?
Sire, only opera can do this. In a play if more than one person speaks at the same time, it's just noise, no one can understand a word. But with opera, with music... with music you can have twenty individuals all talking at the same time, and it's not noise, it's a perfect harmony!
That doesn't really work, does it?
That was Mozart. That! That giggling dirty-minded creature I had just seen, crawling on the floor!
Is that woman still lying on the floor?
Italian is the proper language for opera. All educated people agree on that.
Come on now, be honest! Which one of you wouldn't rather listen to his hairdresser than Hercules? Or Horatius, or Orpheus... people so lofty they sound as if they **** marble!
Forgive me, Majesty. I am a vulgar man! But I assure you, my music is not.
He was my idol. Mozart, I can't think of a time when I didn't know his name.
As I stood there understanding how that bitter old man was still possessing his poor son even from beyond the grave, I began to see a terrible way I could finally triumph over God.
Your son is an unprincipled, spoiled, conceited brat!
A young man trying to impress beyond his abilities.
Can you remember no melody of mine? I was the most famous composer in Europe. I wrote 40 operas alone.
I will speak for you, Father. I speak for all mediocrities in the world. I am their champion. I am their patron saint.
On the page it looked nothing. The beginning simple, almost comic. Just a pulse - bassoons and basset horns - like a rusty squeezebox. Then suddenly - high above it - an oboe, a single note, hanging there unwavering, till a clarinet took over and sweetened it into a phrase of such delight! This was no composition by a performing monkey! This was a music I'd never heard. Filled with such longing, such unfulfillable longing, it had me trembling. It seemed to me that I was hearing the very voice of God.
Looks don't concern me, Maestro. Only talent interests a woman of taste.
That was exactly what I needed. The royal treatment, so to speak.
My name is Lester Burnham. This is my neighborhood; this is my street; this is my life. I am 42 years old; in less than a year I will be dead. Of course I don't know that yet, and in a way, I am dead already.
I will sell this house today, I will sell this house today.
Both my wife and daughter think I'm this gigantic loser and they're right, I have lost something. I'm not exactly sure what it is but I know I didn't always feel this... sedated. But you know what? It's never too late to get it back.
It's that psycho next door. Jane, what if he worships you? What if he's got a shrine with pictures of you surrounded by dead people's heads and stuff?
In order to be successful, one must project an image of success at all times.
Go **** yourself, psycho!
That's my wife, Carolyn. See the way the handle on her pruning shears matches her gardening clogs? That's not an accident.
You ungrateful little brat! Just look at everything you have. When I was your age, we... lived in a duplex! We didn't even have our own house!
I can't believe you don't know how beautiful you are.
I don't think that there's anything worse than being ordinary.
Remember those posters that said, "Today is the first day of the rest of your life"? Well, that's true of every day but one - the day you die.
I was hoping you'd give me a bath. I'm very, very dirty.
Man, oh man. Man, oh man, oh man, oh man, oh man.
Good. I'm looking for the least possible amount of responsibility.
I refuse to be a victim!
My dad thinks I paid for all this with catering jobs. Never underestimate the power of denial.
I'm so sorry for the way things look around here.
Welcome to America's weirdest home videos.
I'm not obsessing. I'm just curious.
It was one of those days when it's a minute away from snowing and there's this electricity in the air, you can almost hear it. And this bag was, like, dancing with me. Like a little kid begging me to play with it. For fifteen minutes. And that's the day I knew there was this entire life behind things, and... this incredibly benevolent force, that wanted me to know there was no reason to be afraid, ever. Video's a poor excuse, I know. But it helps me remember... and I need to remember... Sometimes there's so much beauty in the world I feel like I can't take it, like my heart's going to cave in.
You total ****, you have a crush on him. You're defending him, you love him, you wanna have, like, ten thousand of his babies.
Janie's a pretty typical teenager. Angry, insecure, confused. I wish I could tell her that's all going to pass, but I don't want to lie to her.
Everything that's meant to happen does.
What is this? The ******* *** Pride parade?
Smile! You're at Mr. Smiley's.
You better watch yourself, Jane, or you're going to turn into a real *****, just like your MOTHER!
You don't get to tell me what to do ever again.
Look at me, jerking off in the shower... This will be the high point of my day; it's all downhill from here.
Oh, what? You're mother of the year? You treat her like an employee.
I feel like I've been in a coma for the past twenty years. And I'm just now waking up.
I know you think my dad's harmless, but you're wrong.
Will someone please pass the ******* asparagus?
There happens to be a lot about me that you don't know, Mr. Smarty Man. There's plenty of joy in my life.
She's not your friend. She's just someone you use to feel better about yourself.
I didn't mean to scare you. I just think you're interesting.
This is my first time.
You think you're goin' to heaven because you're honest, but you're not. You're goin' to the same **** as the crooked cops you can't stand.
The number one fear of people isn't dying, it's public speaking.
I sell a product that's better than the competition at a price that's less than the competition.
Even a fool gets to be young once.
The most important thing in business is honesty, integrity, hardwork... family... never forgetting where we came from.
It's not in my best interest to say this Frank, but quitting while you're ahead, is not the same as quitting.
This is my home. This is where my business is, my wife, my mother, my family. This is my country, I ain't goin' nowhere.
You know, what, Terry. I had a pretty good time tonight.
Get your bugaloos out baby! The Wolfman is everywhere.
I don't care if you leave this second!
Hello. Buenos Noches. You sure you don't need a lift somewhere? Huh? Hey, you know John Milner? John Milner's a good friend of mine. Hey, did anybody ever tell you that you look just like Connie Stevens?
Peel out, I just love it when guys peel out.
Sneakin' around with the Wolfman, baby. This is gonna strike a raw nerve, Mama. Here's The Platters.
Joe College strikes out.
A double Chubby-Chuck, a chili-barb, two orders of French fries and...
If you ever get tired of going steady with somebody that ain't around, I'm up for grabs.
Oh, race him. You can beat him.
Why are you so depressed? You'll forget him in a week. After you're elected senior Queen, you'll have so many boys after your bod.
Little kiss on your ear. Goodnight, sweetheart. I'll see you later.
Is that you in that beautiful car? Geez, what a waste of machinery!
Hey, have a popsicle. The ice box just broke down, and they're melting all over the place. You want one?
Rock 'n' Roll will stand man. Who's this on the Wolfman telephone?
Stand by for justice!
Sicker 'n' a dog, that's for sure.
I was a dirty bird, Carol's not grungey - she's bitchin'
Gee, thanks. It's just like a ring or something. It's like were going steady.
I think the street would kill you. Your rhetoric and your propaganda aren't gonna save you out there.
People look at me and see my brother.
Derek, what are you trying to prove?
You got big. I mean, you aged. What I mean is in a good way you got big and older.
Oh, look at that. The good lord is a bit shorter than I reckoned.
If you don't see it, then it's not real.
I say this is the last straw. I came back from the war, my farm was burned down, my cows was dead. And now my wife's run off with my cousin Jeb. That son of a *****. He took my dog!
My professional opinion is that you've managed to **** off the wrong bunch of farm boys this time.
It's going to be a long spring.
I believe "shaved" is the expression.
No longer will our ******* remain flaccid and unused! From now on, we fight for every man out there who isn't getting laid when he should be! This is our day! This is our time! And, by God, we're not gonna let history condemn us to celibacy! We will make a stand! We will succeed! We will get laid!
God... let this be it.
Now, do you know what a clitoris is?
I'm a sophisticated *** robot, sent back in time to change the future for one lucky lady.
This one time, at band camp, I stuck a flute in my *****.
We'll just tell your mother that... we ate it all.
You realize we're all going to go to college as virgins. They probably have special dorms for people like us.
Harold, it's Bateman, Patrick Bateman. You're my lawyer so I think you should know: I've killed a lot of people. Some girls in the apartment uptown uh, some homeless people maybe 5 or 10 um an NYU girl I met in Central Park. I left her in a parking lot behind some donut shop. I killed Bethany, my old girlfriend, with a nail gun, and some man uh some old ****** with a dog last week. I killed another girl with a chainsaw, I had to, she almost got away and uh someone else there I can't remember maybe a model, but she's dead too. And Paul Allen. I killed Paul Allen with an axe in the face, his body is dissolving in a bathtub in Hell's Kitchen. I don't want to leave anything out here. I guess I've killed maybe 20 people, maybe 40. I have tapes of a lot of it, uh some of the girls have seen the tapes. I even, um... I ate some of their brains, and I tried to cook a little. Tonight I, uh, I just had to kill a LOT of people. And I'm not sure I'm gonna get away with it this time. I guess I'll uh, I mean, ah, I guess I'm a pretty uh, I mean I guess I'm a pretty sick guy. So, if you get back tomorrow, I may show up at Harry's Bar, so you know, keep your eyes open.
I don't want to get you drunk, but, ah, that's a very fine Chardonnay you're not drinking.
If you don't shut your ******* mouth, I will kill you.
I have all the characteristics of a human being: blood, flesh, skin, hair; but not a single, clear, identifiable emotion, except for greed and disgust. Something horrible is happening inside of me and I don't know why. My nightly bloodlust has overflown into my days. I feel lethal, on the verge of frenzy. I think my mask of sanity is about to slip.
That's a very fine chardonnay you're drinking. I want you to clean your ******.
Just cool it with the anti-Semitic remarks.
}: I'm not really hungry, I just need to have reservations somewhere.
Don't touch the watch.
I'm leaving. I've assessed the situation, and I'm going.
I'm on the verge of tears by the time we arrive at Espace, since I'm positive we won't have a decent table. But we do, and relief washes over me in an awesome wave.
Hey, I'm a child of divorce, gimme a break!
Listen, you'll have to excuse me. I have a lunch meeting with Cliff Huxtable at the Four Seasons in 20 minutes.
I have to return some videotapes.
I'm fairly certain that Timothy Bryce and Evelyn are having an affair. Timothy is the only interesting person I know. I'm almost completely indifferent as to whether Evelyn knows I'm having an affair with Courtney Rawlinson, her closest friend. Courtney is almost perfect looking. She's usually operating on one or more psychiatric drugs; tonight I believe it's Xanax. More disturbing than the drug use, though, is the fact that she's engaged to Luis Carruthers, the biggest dufus in the business.
Paul Allen has mistaken me for this dickhead Marcus Halberstram. It seems logical because Marcus also works at P&P and in fact does the same exact thing I do and he also has a penchant for Valentino suits and Oliver Peoples glasses. Marcus and I even go to the same barber, although I have a slightly better haircut.
There is an idea of a Patrick Bateman; some kind of abstraction. But there is no real me: only an entity, something illusory. And though I can hide my cold gaze, and you can shake my hand and feel flesh gripping yours and maybe you can even sense our lifestyles are probably comparable... I simply am not there.
Your compliment was sufficient, Luis.
Not the face! You *****! Not the ******* face, you piece of ***** trash!
Look at that subtle off-white coloring. The tasteful thickness of it. Oh my God, it even has a watermark!
I know my behavior can be... *erratic* sometimes.
You're dating Luis, he's in Arizona. You're ******* me and we haven't made plans. What could you possibly be up to tonight?
Get a god-**** job Al.
You're not confused, are you?
Hi, this is Paul Allen. I'm being called away to London for a few days. Meredith, I'll call you when I get back. Hasta la vista, baby.
I like to dissect girls. Did you know I'm utterly insane?
Pumpkin, you're dating an *******.
Not quite blonde, are we? More of a dirty blonde.
I think we should skip the whole courtship thing and just get married.
We are going to get through this. I understand illness. I know how to handle these things.
If you think reading comics about your life seems strange, try watching a play about it. God only knows how I'll feel when I see this movie.
I consider myself a nerd.
I'm going completely crazy.
Can I have a piece of toast?
These dumb *** kids. They never appreciate what you do for them.
Beware the moon, David.
How could there have been witnesses? It was so dark. We were running, and I fell and Jack went to help me up, and this thing came from nowhere. I don't know what they're talking about.
Queen Elizabeth is a man! Prince Charles is a ******! Winston Churchill was full of ****! Shakespeare's French!
Benjamin, have you ever been severely beaten about the face and neck?
I didn't mean to call you a meat loaf, Jack!
A naked American man stole my balloons.
Sean, I think there are some hooligans in the park again.
You scared me, you shithead!
I will not be threatened by a walking meat loaf!
Shall I be forced to feed you, David?
I don't want to lose my virginity to a piece of fruit.
It doesn't have to be teaching. There's always the Civil Service.
It's funny though, isn't it? All that poetry and all those songs, about something that lasts no time at all.
Someone told me that in about 50 years, no one will speak Latin, probably. Not even Latin people.
Way to go, Paula! Way to go!
Casey Jones was a son of a *****; Drove his train through a 30 foot ditch; Came on out with his **** in his hand; Said "Listen ladies, I'm a **** of a man!"; Went into town and lined up a hundred; Swore up and down he'd **** every one; Fucked 98 'til his balls turned blue; Then he backed off, jacked off, and ****** the other two!
In every class, there's always one joker who thinks that he's smarter than me. In this class, that happens to be you. Isn't it, Mayonnaise?
Now this is my idea of an *** bandit. Wait till some of the local girls get a look at you, ******* Head.
Look at the size of this trunk. You can put three bodies in there.
I am grieving. It's a process.
How did he know about the money? And how did he know that Tony Cisco got popped? We didn't find out about it till this morning.
I am redefining weird on an hourly basis.
I was Fredo? I don't think so.
You know normally a patient wouldn't have a vat of Scotch during a session.
Hey, why don't you look over that way before I bust you in your ******' head.
Get a dictionary. Find out what this "closure" thing is. If that's what he's going to hit us with, I want to be ready.
I'd like to see a movie, but it's nothing but this shoot-em-up action ********. I get enough of that at work.
1957 was a big year. The Russians put that Sputnik into outer space, the Dodgers played their last game at Ebbets Field to say goodbye to Brooklyn, that guy shot Frank Costello in the head, and missed, and the Gallo brothers whacked Albert Anastasia in the barber shop of the Sheraton View hotel. It was total chaos. With Anastasia out of the way, Vito Genovese figures he's the big boss. But Carlo Gambino and Joe Bananas, they had other ideas. So they called a meeting. A big meeting.
Call the Vatican. See if something is missing.
The other day, I was watching a commercial with a kid playing with a couple of puppies, I cried for forty five minutes! You slap a pair of **** on me, I'm a woman!
Dad has a patient who thinks he ***** trout.
You should get more roughage in your diet, Doc. A bran muffin in the morning would help that...
He didn't take the money.
I hate trains! Remind me *never* get on the train again.
That's what I hate about this government. Everything's in red.
Dear Grandmama, wish me luck. We'll be together in Paris again soon.
I brought you nectarines cause the peaches were hard as rocks
You know, when they call me, and they all call me, it is so important to them that I know what they ask is the Lord's will. Or Allah's or Yahweh's. And I suppose they're right. 'Cause if he was not vengeful, I would not exist, now would I?
Open the doors, and tell the world the truth.
We will destroy your four pillars. We will brand your Preferiti and sacrifice them on the altars of science, then bring your church down upon you. Vatican City will be consumed by light, a shining star at the end of the path of illumination.
Have you come to make a martyr out of me?
Religion is flawed because man is flawed.
Hello? I forgot my mantra.
Don't worry. We can walk to the curb from here.
Hey, Harvard makes mistakes too! Kissinger taught there!
Don't you see the rest of the country looks upon New York like we're left-wing, communist, Jewish, homosexual pornographers? I think of us that way sometimes and I live here.
Lyndon Johnson is a politician, you know the ethics those guys have. It's like a notch underneath child molester.
Oh my God, she's right. Why did I turn off Allison Portchnik? She was beautiful, she was willing. She was real intelligent. Is it the old Groucho Marx joke that I'm - I just don't want to belong to any club that would have someone like me for a member?
A relationship, I think, is like a shark. You know? It has to constantly move forward or it dies. And I think what we got on our hands is a dead shark.
After that it got pretty late, and we both had to go, but it was great seeing Annie again. I... I realized what a terrific person she was, and... and how much fun it was just knowing her; and I... I, I thought of that old joke, y'know, the, this... this guy goes to a psychiatrist and says, "Doc, uh, my brother's crazy; he thinks he's a chicken." And, uh, the doctor says, "Well, why don't you turn him in?" The guy says, "I would, but I need the eggs." Well, I guess that's pretty much now how I feel about relationships; y'know, they're totally irrational, and crazy, and absurd, and... but, uh, I guess we keep goin' through it because, uh, most of us... need the eggs.
My grammy never gave gifts. She was too busy getting raped by Cossacks.
I can't get with any religion that advertises in Popular Mechanics.
You know, I don't think I could take a mellow evening because I - I don't respond well to mellow. You know what I mean? I have a tendency to - if I get too mellow, I - I ripen and then rot, you know.
Sun is bad for you. Everything our parents said was good is bad. Sun, milk, red meat... college.
I remember the staff at our public school. You know, we had a saying, uh, that those who can't do teach, and those who can't teach, teach gym. And, uh, those who couldn't do anything, I think, were assigned to our school.
Annie, there's a big lobster behind the refrigerator. I can't get it out. This thing's heavy. Maybe if I put a little dish of butter sauce here with a nutcracker, it will run out the other side.
Sylvia Plath - interesting poetess whose tragic suicide was misinterpreted as romantic by the college girl mentality.
Honey, there's a spider in your bathroom the size of a Buick.
That *** was the most fun I've ever had without laughing.
We don't take anything seriously, unless it's on a hard drive.
Don't make my mistake, kid. Don't follow orders your whole life. Think for yourself.
Be honest, kid. Am I hurt bad?
We use Wagner. It scares the **** out of the slopes. My boys love it!
Lieutenant, bomb that tree line about 100 yards back! Give me some room to breathe!
Then you are like us; your home is here.
The war will still be here tomorrow.
Boy, be careful. You play with fire.
Oh, dear God, it's growing bigger!
You can count on my steel.
That's it, go ahead and run. Run home and cry to mama!
How will we stop an army of the dead at our castle walls? How will you fight that? With more words? Most of our people have already fled. We are but sixty men.
It's a trick. Get an axe.
Keep your **** filthy bones outta my mouth.
Well aren't you the sweetest little thing?
Well, it's not right to go into details, I got nervous. I ******* up, I said the wrong thing... Where if I hadn't, I could be in bed right now with a woman who, if you make her laugh, you got a life. Instead I'm here with you  . No offense, but a moron pushing the last legal drug.
I don't get this place. They make me buy a new outfit and let you in a housedress. I don't get it.
You're a disgrace to depression.
Can we get you anything else? Water, coffee, couple of female slaves?
Oh now I'm ******. Now I AM REALLY PISSED!
Over a dog! Over an ugly dog!
Just a little too much reality for a Friday night.
Carol the waitress, Simon the ***.
Have you ever let a romantic moment make you do something that you knew was stupid?
To **** with ***! It was better than ***! We held each other! What I needed, he gave me great.
People who talk in metaphors oughta shampoo my crotch.
Where do they teach you to talk like this? In some Panama City "Sailor wanna hump-hump" bar, or is it getaway day and your last shot at his whiskey? Sell crazy someplace else, we're all stocked up here.
How much more you got to eat? Appetites aren't as big as your noses, huh?
As long as you keep your work zipped up around me, I don't give a rat-**** what or where you shove your show. Are we done being neighbors for now?
What if this is as good as it gets?
Waiting gives devil time.
I can't do this without you. I'm afraid he might pull the stiff one-eye on me.
Great. I'm blind and you're deaf. What a perfect pair.
Why take the escalator when I have a perfectly good canoe right here?
Yeah, and I can't believe Liberace was ***. I mean, women loved him! I didn't see that one coming.
That really hurt! I'm gonna have a lump there, you idiot! Who throws a shoe? Honestly! You fight like a woman!
One more peep out of you and you're grounded Mister and I am not joking. Let's begin.
I demand the sum... OF 1 MILLION DOLLARS.
The details of my life are quite inconsequential... very well, where do I begin? My father was a relentlessly self-improving boulangerie owner from Belgium with low grade narcolepsy and a penchant for buggery. My mother was a fifteen year old French prostitute named Chloe with webbed feet. My father would womanize, he would drink. He would make outrageous claims like he invented the question mark. Sometimes he would accuse chestnuts of being lazy. The sort of general malaise that only the genius possess and the insane lament. My childhood was typical. Summers in Rangoon, luge lessons. In the spring we'd make meat helmets. When I was insolent I was placed in a burlap bag and beaten with reeds- pretty standard really. At the age of twelve I received my first scribe. At the age of fourteen a Zoroastrian named Vilma ritualistically shaved my *********. There really is nothing like a shorn *******... it's breathtaking- I highly suggest you try it.
Well my friend Sweet Jay took me to that video arcade in town, right, and they don't speak English there, so Jay got into a fight and he's all, "Hey quit hasslin' me cuz' I don't speak French" or whatever! And then the guy said something in Paris talk, and I'm like, "Just back off!" And they're all, "Get out!" And we're like, "Make me!" It was cool.
I like to see girls of that... caliber.  By "caliber," of course, I refer to both the size of their gun barrels and the high quality of their characters... Two meanings... caliber... it's a homonym... Forget it.
Pardon me for being rude, it was not me it was my food, it just popped up to say hello, but now it's gone back down below.
Actually, my name is Austin Powers. Danger is my middle name.
I've been frozen for 30 years. I've got to see if my bits and pieces are still working.
That's not your mother, it's a man, baby!
This is Frau Farbissina, founder and leader of the militant wing of the Salvation Army.
My god, Vanessa's got a fabulous body... I bet she shags like a minx... How do I let them know because of the unfreezing process, I have no inner monologue? I hope I didn't just say that all out loud just now.
Does that make you HORNY?
Shall we shag now, or shall we shag later? How do you like to do it? Do you like to wash up first? You know, top and tails... whore's bath? Personally, before I'm on the job, I like to give my undercarriage a bit of a 'how's your father'!
Jesus Christ, boy! What did you eat?
There's nothing as pathetic as an aging hipster.
Do I make you horny? Randy? Do I make you horny, baby, yeah, do I?
Au contraire baby, you can't resist me.
Finally, we come to my number two man. His name? Number Two.
That ain't no woman! It's a man, man!
Buddy, I hate to break it to you, but in the real world... where I live... there're only two kinds of love stories. Boy loses girl and girl loses boy. That's all there is. Somebody always gets left behind. You try to avoid that, you'll end up an old man toastin' yourself with egg nog in the mirror on Christmas Eve. You'll end up dying in your own arms.
I see you, Brother... thank you.  Your spirit will now be with Eywa, but your body will remain for The People.
I may not be much of a horse guy, but I was born to do this.
This is gonna ruin my whole day!
Sooner or later, though, you always have to wake up.
Everything is backwards now, like out there is the true world, and in here is the dream.
Sky People can not learn, they do not see.
Toruk Macto was mighty. He brought the clans together in a time of great sorrow. All Na'vi people know this story.
The way I had it figured, Toruk's the baddest cat in the sky. Nothing attacks him. So why would he ever look up? That was just a theory.
When I was lying in the V.A. hospital with a big hole blown through the middle of my life, I started having these dreams of flying. I was free. But sooner or later, you always have to wake up.
Where's my goddamn cigarette? What's wrong with this picture!
They're not gonna give up their home. They're not gonna make a deal.  For-for what? A light beer and blue jeans? There's nothing that we have that they want. Everything they sent me out here to do is a waste of time. They're never gonna leave Hometree.
I became a marine for the hardship, to be hammered on the anvil of life. I told myself I can pass any test a man can pass.
Shut up and fly straight!
And that's how you scatter the roaches.
All I ever wanted was a single thing worth fighting for.
It is decided. My daughter will teach you our ways. Learn well, "Jakesully", and we will see if your insanity can be cured.
Sometimes your whole life boils down to one insane move.
This is how it's done. When people are sittin' on **** that you want, you make 'em your enemy. Then you're justified in taking it.
I need to get some samples.
Well, well, well. I'd say diplomacy has failed.
You want a fair deal? You're on the wrong planet. The strong prey on the weak, it's just the way things are. And nobody does a ****** thing.
When my son was born healthy, I never asked why. Why was I so lucky? What did I do to deserve this perfect child, this perfect life? But when he got sick, you can bet I asked why! I demanded to know why! Why was this happening?
?the Mighty Mets stormed their locker room shortly after nine o'clock on their night to remember. Released from bondage and ridicule after seven destitute seasons, they raised the roof of Shea Stadium - while their fans attempted to dismantle it - in one of the loudest, wildest victory celebrations in baseball history
Hello. My name is Leonard Lowe. It has been explained to me that I've been away for quite some time.I'm back.
I'm sorry, if you were right, I would agree with you.
You'd think at a certain point all these atypical somethings would amount to a typical something.
They look at us like we're monsters.
You leave, I'll kill you. I'll kill you!
Well Mr. Thompson, that's quite a list. And I think, if I really apply myself, I could be a totally changed person by the time we finish lunch!
I just bet my balls and shook on it.
A strange wang right in my palm.
To girls with big ****!
Chuck. Chuck. It's Marvin - your cousin, Marvin BERRY. You know that new sound you're looking for? Well, listen to this.
I've never seen purple underwear before!
Jesus, George, it was a wonder I was even born.
I'm gonna get that son of a *****.
Hey, McFly. I thought I told you never to come in here.
Look at him... That's my brother god damnit.
Jesus Christ! He's not going to sell you insurance, pick him up!
You guys got something against Dalmatians?
These high-rise gigs give me the creeps.
You see that flash of light in the corner of your eye? That's your career dissipation light. It just went into high gear.
Next time, learn to work the safety with your punk-***.
Tim, you're just a lost ball in the high weeds.
Sure you don't want some lemonade? It don't have the muzzle velocity of some other drinks drunk around here, but it's good for what ails you.
You know, I know what your trouble is, son. You'd like me to die quickly, wouldn't you, without wasting too much of your time; or quietly, so I won't embarrass you too much; or even thankfully, so your memory of the occasion won't be too unpleasant.
You're not only wrong. You're wrong at the top of your voice.
Tim, you've got the body of a hippo but the brain of a rabbit; now don't overtax it.
If you think you're not getting on that bus, man, you're dead wrong. Now get on that ******* bus, 'cause your life ain't worth **** in this town!
Leave it to the Catholic Church. Girls get raped every day, and now we're putting up 50 Gs just 'cause these girls wear ******' penguin suits.
Sweet Jews for Jesus!
**** me, Santa! **** me, Santa! **** me, Santa!
I have to get a loofah and a...  **** the loofah, let's go!
Your name is Thurman Merman?
I'm an eating, drinking, ********, ******* Santy Claus.
Thank you for giving that letter to the cops. I forgot I asked you to do it, but it's a good thing you did or Santa's little helper would have plugged his ***. Now the cop's know I wrote it, whick is gonna keep my *** out of jail. That, plus everyone agreeing that the Phoenix police department shooting an unarmed Santa was even more ****** up than Rodney King.
You are by far the dumbest, most pathetic piece of maggot eatin' **** that has every slid from a human being's hairy ***.
Does your daddy have a safe?
There he is. That lousy, leather-faced, frog-eyed ************.
Oh, my. What a terrible accident. Mm-mm-mm...
OW... OW... OW... I cut my hand, by mistake OW... OW... OW...
Yeah baby, Yeah baby, you not gonna **** right for a week!
I'm not your ******* Da-Da.
It's Christmas and the kid's gettin' his ******' present.
OW! Watch the toenails, kid. ****!
Good night, Santa. Good night, Mrs. Santa's sister.
It's a wooden pickle.
Let me fix you some sandwiches...
************! Oh you lousy, ******* ************.
Why don't you wish in one hand, and **** in the other. See which one fills up first.
My girl Holly and I decided to kill ourselves. The same way I did her Daddy. Big decision, you know. Uh, the reasons are obvious. I don't have time to go into right now. But, one thing though, he was provoking me when I popped him. Well that's what it was like. Pop. I'm sorry. I mean, nobody's coming out of this thing happy. Especially not us. I can't deny we've had fun though.
Listen to your parents and teachers. They got a line on most things, so don't treat em like enemies. There's always an outside chance you can learn something. Try to keep an open mind. Try to understand the viewpoints of others. Consider the minority opinion. But try to get along with the majority of opinion once it's accepted. Of course Holly and I have had fun, even if it has been rushed. And uh, so far a good sign, hadn't got caught. Excuse the grammar.
Suppose I shot you. How'd that be?
I'll give you a dollar if you eat this collie.
Hey, I found a toaster.
The mission was accomplished. All of these people left the room thinking they would have real input. I was writing this pilot alone. Myself. Me. Moi.
I'm not sorry. And I'll not apologize. And I'd as soon go to Dublin as to ****.
No lad who has liberty for the first time, and twenty guineas in his pocket, is very sad, and Barry rode towards Dublin thinking not so much of the kind mother left alone, and of the home behind him, but of tomorrow, and all the wonders it would bring.
If ever I should meet him again you will find out who is the best man of the two. I'll fight him sword or pistol, captain as he is.
I've always found that writing comes from a great inner pain.
Sometimes it gets so hot I want to crawl right out of my skin.
What a day. Felt like I couldn't sell ice water in the Sahara.
Think about it, Fink! Writers come and go; we always need Indians!
Me I just enjoy making things up. Yessah escape. Its when I can't write I can't escape myself, I want to rip my head off and run screaming down the street with my balls in a fruit pickers pail.
The doctor, what's he gonna tell me? Can't trade my head in for a new one.
Wallace Beery. Wrestling picture. What do you need, a roadmap?
Mister Fink, they have not invented a genre of picture that Bill Mayhew has not, at one time or other, been invited to essay. Yes, I have taken my stab at the rasslin' form, as I have stabbed at so many others, and with as little success. I gather that you are a freshman here, eager for an upperclassman's counsel. However, just at the moment, I have drinking to do. Why don't you stop by my bungalow, which is number fifteen, later on this afternoon, and we will discuss rasslin' scenarios and other things lit'rary.
You're a sick ****, Fink.
That son of a *****! Don't get me wrong, he's a fine writer...
***? He's a man! We wrestled!
Yeah... Ladies do ask for attention. In my experience, they pretend to give it, but it's generally a smokescreen for demanding it back with interest.
Okay Fink, let's chow.
All we got to do is tell the story right.
Three things, first you don't have a choice, second i've never taken a bribe in my life, and third... i'm still a little drunk from earlier so if I skip over the witty banter and move straight on to coming on to you I hope you don't take offense.
You think you know everything? You haven't even scratched the surface.
You got ********* Tweety Birds flutterin' around your head, that's what you got! You think you can **** like minks, raise rugrats, and live happily ever after? Aw, man!
What was I supposed to say? "Hey, guys, I'm not ***, but I did **** your suspect"?
What is this? Some kind of JOKE?
Killing isn't like smoking. You can stop.
You know I don't like to wear any underwear, don't you, Nick?
Everyone that she plays with dies.
Let me ask you something, Rocky, man to man. I think she's the **** of the century, what do you think?
That's $2000 and he's from the Metropolitan Museum of Art, suck my *****, you star!
Gentlemen! Let's broaden our minds. Lawrence?
New and improved Joker products! With a new secret ingredient: Smylex.
This is Commissioner Gordon! I want him taken alive! I repeat: Any man who opens fire on Jack Napier will answer to me!
Let him go, or I'll do Gordon.
Now, you can be a part of the action. Witness the entertainment in your living room.  The Box, in every home in America, and one day, the world.
I guess we're all two people.
Batman? Batman, you say? Coming for you?  I'm... COUNTING ON IT!
Your entrance was good... his was better. The difference: showmanship.
Let's see if you bleed green.
This is your brain on the box. This is my brain on the box. Does anybody else feel like a fried egg?
Has anybody ever told you you have a SERIOUS IMPULSE-CONTROL PROBLEM?
Is the young master leaving? Pity. I'll just toss this away, then. Perhaps the dogs are hungry.
Honey, I'm home. Oh, I forgot. I'm not married.
You didn't invite me, so I CRASHED!
I'm not big on speeches, so I'd just like to say: thanks.
Let me guess... trust fund goody-goody?
Maybe this is a bad time to mention this, but my license has expired!
I don't know about you, Miss Kitty, but I feel so much yummier.
Why are you now determined to prove that this Penguin is not what he seems? Must you be the only lonely man-beast in town?
True. I was their number one son, and they treated me like number two.
Sir, shall we change the channel to a program with some dignity and class? The Love Connection, perhaps?
I believe the word you're looking for is "Aaahh"!
It's the so-called "normal" guys who always let you down. Sickos never scare me. Least they're committed.
I am Catwoman. Hear me roar.
Why is their always someone who brings eggs and tomatoes to a speech?
You know what, I mistook me for somebody else.
Please. I wouldn't touch you to scratch you.
Well, the party never stops on Selina Kyle's answering machine...
Actually, this is all just a bad dream. You're at home, in bed, heavily sedated, resting comfortably, dying from the carcinogens you personally spewed in a lifetime of profiteering. Tragic irony or poetic justice, you tell me.
Just relax. I'll take care of the squealing, wretched, pinhead puppets of Gotham!
They wouldn't put me on a pedestal, so I'm layin' 'em on a slab!
But when it comes down to it, who's holding the umbrella?
The tree lights up, and then I push the button. No-no, wait, wait, wait, wait. I press the button and *then* the tree lights up...
How can you be so mean to someone so meaningless?
You gotta admit I played this stinkin' city like a harp from ****.
I may have saved the mayor's baby, but I refuse to save a mayor who stood by helpless *as a baby*, while Gotham City was ravaged by a disease that turned eagle scouts into crazed clowns and happy homemakers into catwomen!
You poor guys. Always confusing your pistols with your privates.
I could really get into this mayor stuff. It's not about power, it's about reaching out to people - touching people - groping people!
Our research tells us that voters like fingers.
Maybe I can help. I'm a veterinarian.
****, I'd rather be in Afghanistan.
That was some new John Wayne ****, Staff Sgt.
Hey, what's wrong with Meat Loaf's butt?
Oh Jesus! Oh God! Oh Jesus! Mary mother Jesus of Nazareth!
Well, I'll be a monkey's bare-assed uncle.
Cut it out butt-hole!
I am the great Cornholio. I need T.P. for my bunghole.
Why does everybody want to see my *******?
Hey, Beavis, check it out. I'm jacking off.
You must bow down to the almighty bunghole!
This is the coolest thing I have ever seen.
Whoa, cool. Hey, can I have a gun, too?
Agent Hurly, I want you to give this scumbag a cavity search. I'm talking Roto-Rooter. Don't stop until you reach the back of his teeth.
Yoohoo! Travis and Bob Head! Hello!
Nice building... bad roof... goooood parking.
What's the good of being a ghost if you can't frighten people away.
We've come for your daughter Chuck.
Delia hates it.  I could live here.
Oh, Adam! We're trapped in this house with those people!
Mom, Dad. I just want you two to know, you're welcome at our house anytime you want to come over. In the meantime, the dowry's on me, dad.
Go ahead... make my millenium.
Number fifty-four million six hundred and one... Ferndoch.
Ugh. Deliver me from L.L. Bean.
Oh, what magic those fingers could work on the right cabinet! Maybe you could alphabetize me. And remember, 'I' comes before 'U'.
Hey Malkovich, think fast!
You're not someone I could get interested in, Craig, you play with dolls.
Nobody's looking for a puppeteer in today's wintry economic climate.
Don't stand in the way of my actualization as a man.
Have you ever had two people look at you, with complete lust and devotion, through the same pair of eyes?
What happens when a man goes through his own portal?
J.M. Inc.: Be all that someone else can be.
Craig, I don't find you attractive, but Lotte, I'm smitten with you. I am... but only when you're in Malkovich. When I was with him last night, I was looking into his eyes and could sense your feminine longing.
Here's the thing: If you ever get me, you wouldn't have a clue what to do with me.
Truth is for suckers, Johnny Boy.
You're nuts to let a girl go that calls you Lotte, I tell you that as a friend.
It's for sure a white man's world in America. Look here: I raised that boy since he was the size of a ****-ant. And I'll say right now, he never learned to read and write. No, sir. Had no brains at all. Was stuffed with rice pudding between th' ears. Shortchanged by the Lord, and dumb as a jackass. Look at him now! Yes, sir, all you've gotta be is white in America, to get whatever you want. Gobbledy-****!
That was a very small room.
Now move, honky, before I cut your white ***.
A ******. If that don't beat all.
I got a tree on my back and a haint in my house, and nothing inbetween but the daughter I'm holding in my arms.
You got two feet, Sethe, not four.
We have a ghost here, you know?
Hey Angel, get out of that bathroom now.
I'd use the chain if I were you.
The space goes down, down baby, down, down the roller coaster. Sweet, sweet baby, sweet, sweet, don't let me go. Shimmy, shimmy, cocoa pop. Shimmy, shimmy, rock. Shimmy, shimmy, cocoa pop. Shimmy, shimmy, rock. I met a girlfriend - a triscuit. She said, a triscuit - a biscuit. Ice cream, soda pop, vanilla on the top. Ooh, Shelly's out, walking down the street, ten times a week. I read it. I said it. I stole my momma's credit. I'm cool. I'm hot. Sock me in the stomach three more times.
Got it, got it, need it, got it...
It occurred to me then, that perhaps the reason for my growth was I was intended for larger things. After all, a giant man can't have an ordinary-sized life.
"The milkman just dropped dead on the porch." Because see, my mother was banging the milkman.
I was thinking about death and all. About seeing how you're gonna die. I mean, on one hand, if dying was all you thought about, it could kind of ***** you up. But it could kind of help you, couldn't it? Because you'd know that everything else you can survive.
Dad, I have no idea who you are because you have never told me a single fact.
Truth is, I've always been thirsty.
Have you ever heard a joke so many times you've forgotten why it's funny? And then you hear it again and suddenly it's new. You remember why you loved it in the first place.
You were a big fish in a small pond, but this here is the ocean and your drownin'. Take my advice, go back to Puddleville; you'll be happy there.
He's almost a stranger, and I prefer him to you!
She'll make soap out of you. That's what she does. She makes soap out of people.
I was the biggest thing Ashton had ever seen. Until one day, a stranger arrived.
They say when you meet the love of your life, time stops, and that's true. What they don't tell you is that when it starts again, it moves extra fast to catch up.
This isn't how I die.
I know better than to argue romance with a French woman.
There's a time when a man needs to fight, and a time when he needs to accept that his destiny is lost... the ship has sailed and only a fool would continue. Truth is... I've always been a fool.
In telling the story of my father's life, it's impossible to separate fact from fiction, the man from the myth. The best I can do is to tell it the way he told me. It doesn't always make sense and most of it never happened... but that's what kind of story this is.
It's rude to talk about religion, you never know who you're gonna offend.
There comes a point when any reasonable man will swallow his pride and admit he made a mistake. The truth is... I was never a reasonable man.
Sandra Templeton, I love you and I WILL marry you.
Sometimes, the only way to catch an uncatchable woman is to offer her a wedding ring.
That was my father's final joke, I guess. A man tells his stories so many times that he becomes the stories. They live on after him. And in that way he becomes immortal.
I've been nothin' but myself since the day I was born, and if you can't see that it's your failin', not mine.
We have to take Glenville to avoid the church traffic because the **** church people drive too slow.
I don't think I'll ever dry out.
With my prospects few, I took a job as a traveling salesman. It suited me. If there's one thing you can say about Edward Bloom, it's that I'm a social person.
You become what you always were - a very big fish.
It was that night I discovered that most things you consider evil or wicked are simply lonely, and lacking in the social niceties.
I'll give you a tune later.
I think... I think we're ****** up. I know I am. But that don't mean what I feel ain't real, that I can't love somebody. And I know what I done is real real bad, but um...  So if you want to quit on me I understand. But please don't.
I'm cookin' steaks fah dinnah. I expect you to stay.
Why you old men gotta talk so much? You gotta talk yourself into ******* me? Like little boys. It's okay. I'm grown, I know. We can go slow.  You gonna give me another bath?
Cain slew Able, slew him out of envy. God put his mark on Cain for his sins, is that what you want Deke? Huh? Is that what you come here for? I'll do it for you, all you got to do is say it again... Say you love me.  SAY YOU LOVE ME *****!
God put you in my path and I aim to cure you of your wicked ways.
There's a war going on out there. Blade, myself, a few others, we've tried to keep it from spilling over onto the streets. Sometimes people like yourself get caught in the cross fire.
Remember what we told you. You keep your eyes open. They're everywhere.
You may wake up one day and find yourself extinct.
Wander off the beaten path, Doctor.
You know, my mother used to say: A cold heart is a dead heart.
Christ! I'm too old for this! Somebody get me a goddamn wheelchair!
Vampires... I hate vampires...
Is the enemy of my enemy my friend or my enemy?
There's an old saying: Keep your friends close, keep your enemies closer.
If there's anything left of you in there, Whistler, listen up. In the morning those blinds are going to open. Whether you're cured or not.
Well, you didn't think I forgot about you, did you?
I'm from the, uh, Confidential Committee on Moral Abuses.
We need you, Sebastian. You're our best and only friend.
Wake up! Time to die!
Not very sporting to fire on an unarmed opponent. I thought you were supposed to be good. Aren't you the "good" man? C'mon, Deckard. Show me what you're made of.
We're not computers, Sebastian, we're physical.
That was irrational of you... not to mention unsportsmanlike.
I think, Sebastian, therefore I am.
Nothing is worse than having an itch you can never scratch!
She's making playlists. She likes to listen to MP3s when she hunts. It's like her own internal soundtrack, you know? Dark core, trip-hop, whatever kids are listening to these days. Me, I'm more of a David Hasselhof fan, you know?
I picked Danica up in a bar, and spent the next five years playing hide-and-go-suck as her little vampire cabana boy. Eventually, Abigail found me, Sommerfield managed to treat me with a cure, and now I kill them. And that's basically turning a frown upside down.
What do you get when you cross a vampire with a werewolf? You get a fur coat that sticks to your neck!
Hey, hey, whoa, whoa, whoa, whoa, whoa! Where're you going?  Where the **** is he going? This is supposed to be a rescue!
You know the kind of woman that just screams trouble? You see her, and every warning bell in your brain starts going off, but you still manage to ask for her number? Well, that's all I ever hook up with. But this betty... whoa! She blew them all away in the shitstorm sweepstakes.
And this walking diaper stain is Jarko Grimwood.
Are you ready to die... ************?
Kill one man, you're a murderer, kill a million, a king. Kill them all, a God.
Don't you know that fur is murder?
He was alive when I buried him.
Let's do it outside, in nature.
And remember, gentlemen, we're always here, two to two, A.M. to P.M., three hundred and sixty-four days and Christmas, God willing and the creek don't rise.
The world is full o' complainers. An' the fact is, nothin' comes with a guarantee. Now I don't care if you're the pope of Rome, President of the United States or Man of the Year; somethin' can all go wrong. Now go on ahead, y'know, complain, tell your problems to your neighbor, ask for help, 'n watch him fly. Now, in Russia, they got it mapped out so that everyone pulls for everyone else... that's the theory, anyway. But what I know about is Texas, an' down here... you're on your own.
JEEEE-zus, I've got a hangover... ... you wanta drink?
Look. Personally I don't give a ****. I know Marty's a hard-on but you gotta do something. I don't know; give the money back, say you're sorry, or get the **** out of here, or something... It's very humiliating, preaching about this ****... I'm not laughing at this, Ray Bob, so you know it's no ******* joke.
Gimme a call whenever you wanna cut off my head. I can always crawl around without it.
Who looks stupid now?
You know, you know, a friend of mine a while back broke his hand and put it in a cast. Very next day, he falls, protects his bad hand, and he breaks his good one. So he breaks it too, you know. So, now he's got two busted flippers. So, I says to him: "Creighton," I says. "I hope your wife really loves you, because for the next five weeks, you can't even wipe your own god **** ***."  That's the test, ain't it? Test of true love.
You failed because you had the wrong dream... What do you know about cocaine?
Man, you don't know **** about smugglin' no drugs!
I thought you couldn't live without your heart.
I was busted. Set up by the FBI and the DEA. That didn't bother me. Set up by Kevin Dulli and Derek Forreal to save their own asses. That didn't bother me. Sentenced to 60 years at Ottisville. That didn't bother me. I'd broken a promise. Everything I love in my life goes away.
I'm seeing something that was always hidden. I'm in the middle of a mystery and it's all secret.
I looked for you in my closet tonight.
Hold me. I'm falling! I'm falling! Hold me.
Why are there people like Frank?
Suave! Goddamn you're one suave ******!
It's a strange world.
Hey neighbour! You ****-for-brains, man! You forgot I have a police radio!
Don't you ******* look at me!
Don't be a good neighbor to her. I'll send you a love letter,  straight from my heart, ******! You know what a love letter is? It's a bullet from a ******* gun, ******! You receive a love letter from me, you're ****** forever! You understand, ****? I'll send you straight to ****, ******!
He put his disease in me.
Do you like the way I feel?
Let's ****! I'll **** anything that moves!
Well, some men, once they get a whiff of it, they trail you like a hound.
Mr. Racine, the next time you come into my courtroom I hope you've got either a better defense, or a better class of client.
I got a serious question for you: What the **** are you doing? This is not **** for you to be messin' with. Are you ready to hear something? I want you to see if this sounds familiar: any time you try a decent crime, you got fifty ways you're gonna **** up. If you think of twenty-five of them, then you're a genius... and you ain't no genius. You remember who told me that?
I'm really disappointed in you, Racine. I've been living vicariously off of you for years. You shut up on me now, all I have is my wife.
Sometimes the **** comes down so heavy I feel like I should wear a hat.
It gets easier, doesn't it Frank?
I don't know why men lie; they just do. Men. Lie.
I don't trust discipline. I know, at that crucial moment, I'd cop out.
What are you looking at? You've probably never had a heavy night in your whole **** disciplined life.
The people who hire me, they don't have to be convinced to save their own lives.
They don't wash cars on the upper level.
Jimmy Bones, is that you? I thought we killed you...
Gangsta of love don't eat no fried chicken!
Dog eat dog, brother.
There's nothing but a dark world of pain locked in that building.
Sherman, I'm coming from the South and I'm starting to not like this!
Sherman... where are all the white people?
This is a tragedy! A fine young man has been struck down. God- fearing, church-going, never in trouble, graduating from high school, ready for college - and somebody comes along - some rich white people in a rich white man's car and wham! They run him down and never even stop. Now what are we going to do about these parking tickets?
Maria, you're incorrigible!
****, you might just be the best **** girl in Texas.
This here's Miss Bonnie Parker. I'm Clyde Barrow. We rob banks.
Why don't y'all go back to your *own* cabin, if you want to play with C.W.
Your advertising's just dandy... folks would never guess you don't have a thing to sell.
Well why not? I earned my share same as everybody. Well, I coulda got killed same as everybody. And I'm wanted by the law same as everybody... I'm a nervous wreck and that's the truth. I have to take sass from Miss Bonnie Parker all the time. I deserve mine.
There's nothing wrong with me, I mean I don't like boys.
You're just like your brother. Ignorant, uneducated hillbilly, except the only special thing about you is your peculiar ideas about love-making, which is no love-making at all.
We got a dollar ninety-eight, and you're laughing!
...the truck drivers come in to eat greasy burgers and they kid you and you kid them back, but they're stupid and dumb, boys with big tattoos all over 'em, and you don't like it... And they ask you for dates and sometimes you go... but you mostly don't, and all they ever try is to get into your pants whether you want to or not... and you go home and sit in your room and think, when and how will I ever get away from this?... And now you know.
I'm ready to shoot RIGHT NOW.
He's my 17-year-old piece of gold.
Jack, I'm 26 years old, I didn't run away from home.
He's out.  And you're out, too. And I dont think I'm in, either. No gang!
We make our own choices, we pay our own prices.
Either pull the trigger or get that ******* thing out of my face.
I have this image of you - inside of me - like a part of me.
When you get tired of Cagney and Lacey, find me.
Oh, Johnny hits on me all the time. He hits on anything in high heels.
Try not to steal anything on your way out...
I'm a dead man, Johnnie? I'm a ******* dead man? Guess again, Johnnie. Who's the dead man? Who? Who's dead, fuckface? Who? Who? I can't hear you, Johnnie. Guess again. Take another guess, Johnnie. Take another ******* guess.
Hold the elevator. Thanks.
If there's one thing I can't stand about sleeping with women, it's all the ******* mind-reading.
Englishmen don't know what a tongue is for.
I hope you've washed your *** this morning, it's about to be kissed by a king.
The king will be dead in a month and his son is a weakling. Who do you think will rule this kingdom?
Who is this person who speaks to me as though I needed his advice?
First, learn to use  this. Then I'll teach you to use  this.
God tells me he can get me out of this mess, but he's pretty sure you're ******.
Lower your flags and march straight back to England, stopping at every home you pass by to beg forgiveness for a hundred years of theft, rape, and murder. Do that and your men shall live. Do it not, and every one of you will die today.
My son's loyal wife returns, unkilled by the heathen.
You have bled with Wallace, now bleed with me.
The Almighty says this must be a fashionable fight. It's drawn the finest people.
I came back home to raise crops, and God willing, a family. If I can live in peace, I will.
In the Year of our Lord 1314, patriots of Scotland - starving and outnumbered - charged the fields of Bannockburn. They fought like warrior poets; they fought like Scotsmen, and won their freedom.
Every man dies, not every man really lives.
You see? Death comes to us all. But before it comes to you, know this: your blood dies with you. A child who is not of your line grows in my belly. Your son will not sit long on the throne. I swear it.
I'm the one who's rotting, but I think your face looks graver than mine.
Before we let you leave, your commander must cross that field, present himself before this army, put his head between his legs, and kiss his own ****.
There's a difference between us. You think the people of this country exist to provide you with position. I think your position exists to provide those people with freedom. And I go to make sure that they have it.
We all end up dead, it's just a question of how and why.
This is your receipt for your husband... and this is my receipt for your receipt.
Mistakes? We don't make mistakes.
All you've got to do is blow your nose and it's fixed, in't it?
Bad sportsmanship. A ruthless minority of people seem to have forgotten good old-fashioned virtues. They just can't stand seeing the other fellow win. If these people would just play the game...
What have you done with his body?
Where'd you get this from, eh? Out yer nostril?
Yes... No... I don't know. I don't know what I want.
We're fielding all their strokes, running a lot of them out, and pretty consistently knocking them for six. I'd say they're nearly out of the game.
Just me and my little knife! Snip snip - slice slice... can you believe it?
Jill? Yes... Sam I think I ought to tell you. I'm afraid she's upped stumps and retired to the pavillion. Thrown in the towel.
Mr. Lowry, can you wait in reception? You're giving her wrinkles.
My good friends call me Harry.
Bloody typical, they've gone back to metric without telling us.
Care for a little necrophilia? Hmmm?
Sorry, I'm a bit of a stickler for paperwork. Where would we be if we didn't follow the correct procedures?
I assure you, Mrs. Buttle, the Ministry is very scrupulous about following up and eradicating any error. If you have any complaints which you'd like to make, I'd be more than happy to send you the appropriate forms.
Computers are my forte!
There you are, your own number on your very own door. And behind that door, your very own office! Welcome to the team, DZ-015
You'd better pray she's still alive.
Uh-huh. And he wants cash on the nail. He's a pot-skulled reef worm with more hop in his head than blood. Why pay for dirt you can't believe?
Come to see the show?
You better be sure you wanna know what you wanna know.
Throw one at me if you want, hash head. I've got all five senses and I slept last night, that puts me six up on the lot of you.
I fed you Jerr to see him get eaten not to see you fed!
No more of these informal chats! If you have a disciplinary issue with me, write me up or suspend me and I'll see you at the Parent-Teacher conference.
She nearly shook me upside down. Can't say I didn't enjoy it, but why'd she come to me?
You did good Brain. Go sleep.
No, bulls would gum it. They'd flash their dusty standards at the wide-eyes and probably find some yegg to pin, probably even the right one. But they'd trample the real tracks and scare the real players back into their holes, and if we're doing this I want the whole story. No cops, not for a bit.
She just sprung it on me, just...  It's a **** of a thing to spring on a guy. I don't remember much, Laura talked me down after, said whatever... she knew her, said it wasn't true, but I still think sometimes... think about it being true... about it being mine. Maybe I did it 'cause I thought it was true. It's a **** of a thing.
Maybe I'll just sit here and bleed at you.
Oh, you live in Milwaukee? Oh, I'm sorry.
Twelve David, on the corner of Thirty-eight and Two you'll find a three car accident. Two taxis and a taxi. One-two Henry, 427 East Two-two, report of a very bad smell.
I gotta get a drink. Sobriety's killing me.
Frank, what do you know? It's you and me again tonight. The rough riders, tearing up the streets, just like old times. This old bus is a warrior, Frank. I have tried to kill her, but she will not die. I have a great respect for that.
Saving someone's life is like falling in love. The best drug in the world. For days, sometimes weeks afterwards, you walk the streets, making infinite whatever you see. Once, for a few weeks, I couldn't feel the earth - everything I touched became lighter. Horns played in my shoes. Flowers fell from my pockets. You wonder if you've become immortal, as if you've saved your own life as well. God has passed through you. Why deny it, that for a moment there - why deny that for a moment there, God was you?
The first step is love, the second is mercy.
66-Exterminator here. We like our coffee bloody!
Oh, I see. With all the poor people of this city who wanted only to live and were viciously murdered, you have the nerve to sit here, wanting to die, and not go through with it? You make me sick!
You'll be going to the man who needs no introduction. Chronic caller of the year three straight and shooting for number four. The duke of drunk, the king of stink, our most frequent flier, Mr. Oh.
Tom, where are the Band-Aids? This IS an ambulance, isn't it?
Ever notice people who see **** are always crazy?
I'd always had nightmares, but now the ghosts didn't wait for me to sleep.
Don't make me take off my sunglasses!
Except for socially, you're my role model.
Wouldn't this be a great world if insecurity and desperation made us more attractive? If "needy" were a turn-on?
You really blew the lid off of nookie
I-I can't help you. Sorry, I'm not here to teach remedial reporting.
Do you do bunny rabbits?
Just what do you want from me anyway, permission to be a fake? Stop whining.
And if things had gone differently for me tonight then I probably wouldn't be saying any of this. I grant you everything. But give me this: he personifies everything that you've been fighting against. And I'm in love with you. How do you like that? I buried the lead.
I think we have the kind of friendship where if I were the devil, you'd be the only one I would tell.
Let's never forget, we're the real story, not them.
This is more than Nixon ever sweated.
I say it here, it comes out there.
If anything happens to me, you tell every woman I've ever gone out with I was talking about her at the end. That way they'll have to reevaluate me.
Can you believe it? I just risked my life for a network that tests my face with focus groups.  I don't feel good.
I don't know what's scarier, losing nuclear weapons, or that it happens so often there's actually a term for it.
I just realized something. I never actually killed anyone before. I mean, I dropped bombs on Baghdad, but, uh... never face to face.  I don't know what the big deal is. I really don't.
You know, these exercises are fantastic. When the day comes that we have to go to war against Utah, we're really gonna kick ***, y'know?
I saw it, and it was *good*!
I'm Bruce Nolan with Eyewitness Nose... Eyewitness Nose... that's right!
Bruce giveth and Bruce taketh away. Don't like it? Megabyte me.
Is your child in dire jeopardy? Find out tonight, after the game.
And that's the way the cookie crumbles.
You can't kneel down in the middle of a highway and live to talk about it, son.
Does the word "duh" mean anything to you?
Does Elvis talk to you? Does he tell you to do things? Do you see spots?
Excuse much! Rude or anything?
Buffy? What's your sitch? You're acting like the thing from another tax bracket.
I have detention slips here and I'm not afraid to use them.
Pike isn't a name, it's a fish.
Great. My secret weapon is PMS. That's just terrific. Thanks for telling me.
Get out of my facial!
Three weeks ago, all I thought about was... well I didn't actually think about anything.
Merrick, you made a Joke. Are you okay? Do You want to lie down? I know it hurts the first time
Sears sucks, Crash. Boy, I worked there once. Sold Lady Kenmores. *****, whoa, *****.
Throw that **** again, Meat. Throw that weak-*** **** again.
Why's he calling me meat? I'm the one driving a Porsche.
Well if anyone would know you were pulling your hips out early it'd be Annie.
Your shower shoes have fungus on them. You'll never make it to the bigs with fungus on your shower shoes. Think classy, you'll be classy. If you win 20 in the show, you can let the fungus grow back and the press'll think you're colorful. Until you win 20 in the show, however, it means you are a slob.
I dare you to throw the hammer. You ain't that stupid.
I have been known on occasion to howl at the moon.
Walt Whitman once said, "I see great things in baseball. It's our game, the American game. It will repair our losses and be a blessing to us." You could look it up.
This son of a ***** is throwing a two-hit shutout. He's shaking me off. You believe that ****? Charlie, here comes the deuce. And when you speak of me, speak well.
Yeah, I was in the show. I was in the show for 21 days once - the 21 greatest days of my life. You know, you never handle your luggage in the show, somebody else carries your bags. It was great. You hit white balls for batting practice, the ballparks are like cathedrals, the hotels all have room service, and the women all have long legs and brains.
I'm buried in a box. I'm buried in a box!
...that your ransom video already has 47,000 hits on YouTube.
You didn't tell me you could sing like that!
If I'm not 20 times better than "***** for brains" over there, you don't have to pay me.
Oh, God, Georgia. Tell me you don't have the flu.  Oh no... please have the flu!
Oh my ****... I just killed a ******* spook!
Maybe I can get a run in.
Osbourne Cox? I thought you might be worried... about the security... of your ****.
we've been over, and over, and over this, first you say you can't commit, and then... would you come down from there?
Dry land is not a myth. I've seen it. Kevin Costner. Waterworld. I don't know what the big fuss is about. I saw that movie nine times. It rules!
The future is now! Soon every American home will integrate their television, phone and computer. You'll be able to visit the Louvre on one channel, or watch female wrestling on another. You can do your shopping at home, or play Mortal Kombat with a friend from Vietnam. There's no end to the possibilities!
Dos thus have thou a mug of ale for me and me mate, for he hath been pitched in battle for a fortnight and has the king's thirst for the frosty brew dos thou might have for thus!
Cable guy!  Cably Guy? Cable Guy!  Cabla goobla!
Free cable is the ultimate aphrodisiac.
You're gonna have to do better than that, Steven. Steven. St-st-my lisp is gone!  You thtupid thon of a *****!
I just wanna hang out. NO BIG DEAL!
I asked my girlfriend to marry me and she asked me to move out.
Quickly, muster atop your steed. Buddy, get on the friggin' horse. I don't think he's kidding.
He's naturally mendacious. Not to be trusted. If he had a hundred dollars he'd steal a stick of chewing gum.
We're not so different as you might think.
I have 94 per cent recall of all conversation. I tested it myself.
If I leave here without understanding you, the world will see you as a monster. Always. And I don't want that.
She was asking about you earlier in a way that made me very jealous...
You'll excuse me, gentlemen. Your business is politics, mine is running a saloon.
First they take Ugarte and then she walks in. Well, I guess that's the way it goes... one out and one in.
Ricky, I'm going to miss you. Apparently you're the only one in Casablanca with less scruples than I.
I'm on their blacklist - their roll of honor!
Play the "Marseillaise."... Play it!
Welcome back to the fight. This time I know our side will win.
I don't like disturbances in my place.  Either lay off politics, or get out.
I stick my neck out for *nobody*!
If he ever gets a *word* in, it'll be a major Italian *victory*.
As the leader of all illegal activities in Casablanca, I am an influential and respected man.
Alright, I'll make it easier for you: Go ahead and shoot. You'll be doing me a favor.
Louis, I think this is the beginning of a beautiful friendship.
I wouldn't bring up Paris if I were you, it's poor salesmanship.
Kiss me. Kiss me as if it were the last time.
Might as well be frank, monsieur. It would take a miracle to get you out of Casablanca, and the Germans have outlawed miracles.
Major Strasser has been shot. Round up the usual suspects.
Of all the gin joints, in all the towns, in all the world, she walks into mine.
Realizing the importance of the case, my men are rounding up twice the usual number of suspects.
And what if you track down these men and kill them, what if you killed all of us? From every corner of Europe, hundreds, thousands would rise up to take our places. Even Nazis can't kill that fast.
When it looked like they could get twenty-five years to life in prison just for skimming a casino, sick or no ******' sick you knew people were going to get clipped.
What are you staring at you bald-headed Jew prick?
And take it easy with this ****, will you? I mean, this can only make matters worse. You're a beautiful girl. You don't want to ruin your looks. I've seen a lot of girls get shot to **** from this stuff.
The bombing was never authorized, but I suspect I know who lit the fuse. And so did the powers that be.
They had enough of Nicky. They had enough. I mean, how much more were they gonna take? So, they made an example of him and his brother: they buried them while they were still breathing.
Take this stiff and pound it up your ******* ***!
Get this through your head you Jew ************, you! You only exist out here because of me! That's the only reason! Without *me*, you, personally, every ******' wise guy skell around'll take a piece of your ******' Jew ***! Then where you gonna go? You're ******' warned! Don't ever go over my ******' head again! You ************, you.
Listen, if you didn't know you're bein' scammed, you're too ******' dumb to keep this job. If you did know, you were in on it. Either way, you're out. Get out! Go on. Let's go.
For two days and two ******' nights, we beat the **** out of this guy. I mean, we even stuck ice-picks in his balls.
I don't give a **** who he's connected to. Tell him to take his ******' feet off the table. What's he think this is, a goddamn sawdust joint?
You took your boots off? You put your feet on the table? You ****-kicking, stinky, horse-manure-smellin' ************ you. You **** me up over there, I'll stick you in a hole in the ******' desert.
Can you feel my eyes on you? Can you feel me look into your heart? Can you feel me in the pit of your stomach? Can you feel me in you? In your heart?
Normally, my prospects of coming back alive from a meeting with Nicky were 99 out of 100. But this time, when I heard him say "a couple of hundred yards down the road", I gave myself 50-50.
Back home, they would have put me in jail for what I'm doing. Here, they're giving me awards.
For Nicky, Las Vegas was the ******* wild west.
Listen to me very carefully. There are three ways of doing things around here: the right way, the wrong way, and the way that *I* do it. You understand?
That's a lot of money to be counting out in public.
In the casino, the cardinal rule is to keep them playing and to keep them coming back. The longer they play, the more they lose, and in the end, we get it all.
Tell that ******' Pepe if he's switching stones on us, he'd better take a ******* camel back to Nigeria.
Now, notice how in the count room nobody ever seems to see anything. Somehow, somebody's always lookin' the other way. Now, look at these guys. They look busy, right? They're countin' money. Who wants to bother them? I mean, God forbid they should make a mistake and forget to steal.
When you love someone, you've gotta trust them. There's no other way. You've got to give them the key to everything that's yours. Otherwise, what's the point? And for a while, I believed, that's the kind of love I had.
What's he doing? He knows those guys he yelled at are friends of ours. What's the matter with him? Making all this mess!
I'm what counts out here. Not your ******' country clubs or your ******' TV shows. And what the **** are you doin' on TV anyhow?
Look at this ****** beaut they put in now. Sherbert send you in here to rob me now? Been ******* knocking everyone's **** in all night? Huh, you been beating all the customers tonight, ************? Huh? Jag-off. Hit me.
Now, on top of everything else, I gotta make sure no one ***** around with the Golden Jew.
She was doing pretty good with her lawsuit. But before she could start counting her money, the boys back home decided to settle the case out of court instead. So they sent me.
I want you to exit this guy off the premises, I want you to exit him off his feet and I want you to use his head to open the ******* door.
You hear a little girl, Frankie? Is that a little girl, Ace? Is that a little ******' girl? What happened to the ******' tough guy who told my friend to stick it up his ******' ***?
If a guy ******* tripped over a banana peel, they'd bring me in for it.
Whoever it was, they put the dynamite under the passenger's side. But what they didn't know, what nobody outside the factory knew, was that that model car was made with a metal plate under the driver's seat. It's the only thing that saved my life.
Peek-a-boo, you *****, you!
I think in all fairness, I should explain to you exactly what it is that I do. For instance tomorrow morning I'll get up nice and early, take a walk down over to the bank and... walk in and see and, uh... if you don't have my money for me, I'll... crack your ******' head wide-open in front of everybody in the bank. And just about the time that I'm comin' out of jail, hopefully, you'll be coming out of your coma. And guess what? I'll split your ******' head open again. 'Cause I'm ******' stupid. I don't give a **** about jail. That's my business. That's what I do.
How the **** can you grin?
******' bosses. I mean, they're smokin' their Di Nobilis and they're eatin' trippa and ******' suffritt', you know, fried pigs guts? While, if I wanna talk private, I gotta go to a ******' bus stop.
That black book's a joke. It's only got two names in it for the whole country. And one of them's still Al Capone.
Give yourself a hand, right across your ******* mouth.
You ******* mo-mo, what's the matter with you?
No matter how big a guy might be, Nicky would take him on. You beat Nicky with fists, he comes back with a bat. You beat him with a knife, he comes back with a gun. And if you beat him with a gun, you better kill him, because he'll keep comin' back and back until one of you is dead.
A lot of holes in the desert, and a lot of problems are buried in those holes. But you gotta do it right. I mean, you gotta have the hole already dug before you show up with a package in the trunk. Otherwise, you're talking about a half-hour to forty-five minutes worth of digging. And who knows who's gonna come along in that time? Pretty soon, you gotta dig a few more holes. You could be there all ******' night.
You call yourself a man? You know you're a lyin', low-life, motherfuckin' gambling degenerate prick? You know that's what you are? Two small kids at home. I gave you money to pay the ******' rent and buy groceries, put the heat on. You know your wife called Frankie and told him the ******' heat's off? Huh? And you didn't gamble that ******' money? You're gonna stand here and tell me that?
Take this one and stick it up your sister's ***!
Me? Thats why The Bosses sent me out here - they wanted me to make sure none of the other crews robbed the joint. Like these two ******' ballonheads over here. They were gonna try to bang us outta two hundred ******' grand? Yeah, right, I'm sure.
Nicky's methods of betting weren't scientific, but they worked. When he won, he collected. When he lost, he told the bookies to go **** themselves. I mean, what were they going to do, muscle Nicky? Nicky was the muscle.
Ah, people only know what you tell them, Carl.
Two little mice fell in a bucket of cream. The first mouse quickly gave up and drowned. The second mouse, wouldn't quit. He struggled so hard that eventually he churned that cream into butter and crawled out. Gentlemen, as of this moment, I am that second mouse.
How'd you do it Frank? How did you cheat on the bar exam in Louisiana?
White Russian, no ice, no vodka... hold the Kahlua.
Amateurs! You boys thought you could come in here and steal all these beautiful things? What a purrrfect idea!
You saved my life, Midnight. But somebody killed me and I've got to find out who and why.
"Ricky Martin"? You named your kid "Ricky Martin"?
Tenth grade biology. Brachial artery... pumps 30 liters of blood a minute. There's only five in the human body. I'm sorry.
You've got the wrong family! You've got the wrong family!
Do you want to die here?
**** you and the horse you rode in on.
It's raining cats, dogs, and democrats out there, this better be worth it.
Mrs. Collins, if that boy's your son I'll eat my yard stick.
I used to tell Walter, "Never start a fight... but always finish it." I didn't start this fight... but by God, I'm going to finish it.
Dig. You put them in the ground, now you can take them out. You heard me. Dig.
You picked the wrong day not to use the ATM.
You know, I've got a bike myself. Maybe we can... go for a ride.  Or maybe I could just ride you...
Of course, you won't be able to lie on your back for a while but then you can lie from any position, can't you?
I can't stand these things... it's like drinking coffee through a veil.
Heroin, peppermint-flavored heroin.
Three of them. All in their pyjamas? C'est ridicule! What is it, some new American fad?
It is infuriating that your unhappiness does not turn to fat!
This is a ludicrous situation. I can think of a dozen men who are just longing to use my shower.
Do you know what these things cost over here?
Hey! I like that guy!
Another movie from an old TV show.
Do you know how hard it is to find a quality man in Los Angeles?
Why do they always run?
Catholic school girls. The uniform's what does it for me. I wish I had've went with more Catholic school girls when I was a kid. As it stands I have no, "And then she unzipped her jumper," stories.
***** that "all for one" ****, alright? I gotta deal with being a minority in a minority of the minority, and nobody's supportin' my ***.
And then, Black Beauty couldn't take it any longer and he finally did some of his own mounting.
See that man right there? He the Devil, understand? Never take your eye off the man.
Now *that*, my friend, is a shared moment.
Since you like chicks, right, do you just look at yourself naked in the mirror all the time?
Archie is *not* ******* Mr. Weatherbee!
******* ******, man! Did you *see* that? Your ****-courting *** just got me scored on.
You're way too conservative for that girl. She's been around and seen things we've only read about in books.
You gotta boil it down to the essentials. It's like Cube says, "Life ain't nothin' but ******* and money."
Alyssa Jones? **** I know Alyssa Jones, I mean I KNOW Alyssa Jones! Know what I'm sayin'? Me and Rick Darris used to hang around her house after school and **** cause her parents were like never home and ****. One day Rick just whips it out and starts rubbin it on her leg and ****, starts chasin her around the living room. I was dyin. But you know what the crazy ***** did? She drops to her knees and she just starts suckin him off. Right there in front of me, like I wasn't even there man. I almost died. But that's not the ****** up part. The ****** up part was Rick, man, right in the middle of it, he turns to me and he says 'Cohee!' Just like that, 'Co-Hee!' So I'm like, "Yo ill give it a shot." So I start pullin' her pants down and ****. All slow cause I'm figurin' any minute she's gonna turn around and belt me in the mouth and **** right? But yo check this **** out man. Shes all into it. She doesn't even try to stop me or nothin'. Shes all wet and **** and I just start going to work, Know what I'm sayin? Me and Rick are just going to town on this crazy ***** and shes just loving it, all moaning and ****, it was ****** up! So Ricks the one that came up with the nickname, cause that day she had us locked in tight from both ends like a pair of god-****** Chinese finger cuffs!
It all goes back to something my grandmother told me when I was a kid. "Holden," she said, "the big bucks are in **** and **** jokes." She was a church goer.
This is all gonna end badly.
I like you, Holden. I haven't liked a man in a long time. And it's not because I'm a man hater or something like that. It's just been sometime that I've been exposed to a man that didn't immediately live into a stereotype of some sort. And I want you to feel comfortable with me, because I'd really like us to be friends.
Okay, I've had my finger up my ***. I wouldn't say I've had anal ***.
Since most of these people are rooting for the home team, I'm gonna cheer for the visitors. I'm a big visitors fan. Especially the kind that make coffee for ya in the morning before they go!
I feel a hate crime coming on.
If this is a crush, I don't think I could take it if the real thing ever happened.
What does it matter if I refer to her as a ****? Or if I call the Whalers a bunch of ******* in the privacy of my own office, far from the sensitive ears of the rest of the world?
I think it's more like Banky's having a real problem with all things not hetero right about now.
Everybody has an agenda, alright? Everyone.
Bring on the free hooch!
You gotta respect that kind of display of affection, you know what I mean? Sure, it's crazy, it's rude, it's self-absorbed, but, uh, you know, it's love.
Archie was the ***** and Jughead was the butch. That's why Jughead wears that crown-looking hat all the time. He the king of queen Archie's world.
I see you like publicity, Mr. Gittes. Well, you're going to get it.
Let me explain something to you, Walsh. This business requires a certain amount of finesse.
'Course I'm respectable. I'm old. Politicians, ugly buildings, and ****** all get respectable if they last long enough.
What can I tell you, kid? You're right. When you're right, you're right, and you're right.
You've got a ***** reputation, Mr. Gittes. I like that.
Can you believe it? We're in the middle of a drought, and the water commissioner drowns. Only in L.A.
You're a very nosy fellow, kitty cat. Huh? You know what happens to nosy fellows? Huh? No? Wanna guess? Huh? No? Okay. They lose their noses.
Have you ever heard the expression "Let sleeping dogs lie"? Sometimes you're better off not knowing.
All right, Curly. Enough's enough. You can't eat the Venetian blinds. I just had them installed on Wednesday.
I think it would be fun to run a newspaper.
A toast, Jedediah: to Love on my own terms.
Mr. Kane is finishing the review you started - he's writing a bad notice. I guess that'll show you.
We have no secrets from our readers. Mr. Thatcher is one of our most devoted readers, Mr. Bernstein. He knows what's wrong with every issue since I've taken charge.
As Charles Foster Kane who owns eighty-two thousand, six hundred and thirty-four shares of public transit - you see, I do have a general idea of my holdings - I sympathize with you. Charles Foster Kane is a scoundrel. His paper should be run out of town. A committee should be formed to boycott him. You may, if you can form such a committee, put me down for a contribution of one thousand dollars.
I can remember everything. That's my curse, young man. It's the greatest curse that's ever been inflicted on the human race: memory.
Who's the busiest man? Me? I've got nothing but time! What do you wanna know?
Old age. It's the only disease, Mr. Thompson, that you don't look forward to being cured of.
Love! You don't love anybody! Me or anybody else! You want to be loved - that's all you want! I'm Charles Foster Kane. Whatever you want - just name it and it's yours! Only love me! Don't expect me to love you
You're the greatest fool I've ever known, Kane. If it was anybody else, I'd say what's going to happen to you would be a lesson to you. Only you're going to need more than one lesson. And you're going to get more than one lesson.
A fellow will remember a lot of things you wouldn't think he'd remember. You take me. One day, back in 1896, I was crossing over to Jersey on the ferry, and as we pulled out, there was another ferry pulling in, and on it there was a girl waiting to get off. A white dress she had on. She was carrying a white parasol. I only saw her for one second. She didn't see me at all, but I'll bet a month hasn't gone by since that I haven't thought of that girl.
There's only one person in the world who's going to decide what I'm going to do and that's me...
Godfather has more eyes than a pineapple!
You know, there's a million fine looking women in the world, dude. But they don't all bring you lasagna at work. Most of 'em just cheat on you.
Melodrama coming from you seems about as natural as an oral bowel movement.
People say crazy **** during ***. One time I called this girl "Mom."
Hey, try not to suck any **** on the way through the parking lot!
All right, so they bring in independent contractors, why are you so upset at its destruction?
It's important to have a job that makes a difference, boys. That's why I manually ********** caged animals for artificial insemination.
I'm offering you my body and you're offering me semantics.
Yeah, I mean aside from the cheating, we were a great couple. I mean that's what high school was about, algebra, bad lunch, and infidelity.
Hello. What? No I don't work today, I'm playing hockey at two.
I'm not even supposed to be here today!
A little word of advice, my friend. Sometimes you gotta let those hard-to-reach chips go.
You get me slapped with a fine. You pick fights with the customers and I have to patch everything up. You get us chased out of a funeral home by violating a corpse. To top it all off, you ruined my relationship with Veronica! What's your encore? Do you, like, anally rape my mother while pouring sugar in my gas tank?
Remember, shithead! Keep your arms and legs in the vehicle at all times!
Greatness is overrated.
I started playing baseball when I was a kid like everybody else but better than everybody else.
Know ye that a prince and a great man has fallen this day.
'Cobb, a prince among men, misunderstood in his genius, as genius always is'...  This is the second line from what will be the greatest biography of a great man ever written - type it!
And you sir, you should leave this disgusting, wretched, sorry son of a ************ - immediately. Good evening.
Hey Sarge! You know how a Camacho's like a cue ball? Cause the harder you hit 'em, the better their English gets.
When I want your opinion, I'll beat it out of you.
Daddy, come inside before you drown!
Well, you have your war.
Ruby, this fence may be the first thing I ever did that might produce an actual result.
My daddy - he'd walk forty miles for liquor but not forty inches for kindness.
So, you have never wrapped your legs around this Inman?
Don't worry, son. Those Yankee boys keep store hours. They ain't open yet.
Old lady Swanger says you need help. Here I am.
I've had to put myself in the way of people's kindness.
Play me something sweet... like a girl's waiting for me.
Number one - shut this door, it's freezing. Number two - shut that door, it's freezing. I'm laying on my back, with my fingers poked in my ears trying to shut out who's got a bag of diamonds and who's carrying a tray. If you want to get three feet up a bull's ***, listen to what sweethearts whisper to each other. Now, if you're going to wimble wimble all night, I'm going to sleep in with him.
I'm wetter than a fish.
Oh, he's so full of manure, that man! We could lay him in the dirt and grow another one just like him.
I despise a floggin' rooster.
Just so you know - you're not eating inside. Number one: they hang people round here for taking in deserters. Number two: even if they gave out prizes you'd still eat outside.
Let's put him in a pot.
We got our own story. Called Black Cove Farm: a catastrophe. I can spell it, too. Learned it the same place you did, in the school room. One of the first words they taught me. "Ruby Thewes, you are a c-a-t-a-s-t-r-o-p-h-e!"
Used to be as regular as morning prayers. Matter of fact I could set my watch by my bowels. That beeswax you fed me, day before yesterday, it stops a man up. Open my gut now they'd find ***** stacked up like little black twigs.
By order of Zebulon Vance, Governor of this great state of North Carolina: any soldier turned deserter is guilty of treason and shall be hunted down like a dog. Any man takes in a deserter is likewise guilty of treason.
I've learned a person can pretty much survive off of a goat. A goat gives you company, and milk, and cheese... and when you need it, good meat.
Thank you. I was going to do a grievous wrong.
Congratulations. I'll send you out with a shot gun a lot more.
Well, that was brilliant...
Get with it. Millions of galaxies of hundreds of millions of stars, in a speck on one in a blink. That's us, lost in space. The cop, you, me... Who notices?
Take comfort in knowing you never had a choice.
Don't get me cornered. You don't have the trunk space.
Since when is LAPD working for the Feebs?
Only thing that didn't show up is the Polish cavalry.
Guy gets on the subway and dies. Think anybody'll notice?
If you open that trunk, they go inside.
Definitely not from around here.
Of all the cabbies in L.A. I get Max, Sigmund Freud meets Dr. Ruth.
Hey, man, what did you do, have a food fight in here?
I'll show you collateral damage!
Insane asylums are filled with people who think they're Jesus or Satan. Very few have delusions of being a guy down the block who works for an insurance company.
I'm not killing people... my future's in television.
Think of it as a hobby. Something you do to relax. You're an "assassination enthusiast."
When you are young, your potential is infinite. You might do anything, really. You might be Einstein. You might be DiMaggio. Then you get to an age where what you might be gives way to what you have been. You weren't Einstein. You weren't anything. That's a bad moment.
Life was sweet... For a minute.
Very good Chuck. I am pleasantly surprised, you're not like the other murderers.
I came up with a new game-show idea recently. It's called The Old Game. You got three old guys with loaded guns onstage. They look back at their lives, see who they were, what they accomplished, how close they came to realizing their dreams. The winner is the one who doesn't blow his brains out. He gets a refrigerator.
You're 32 years old, and you've achieved nothing. Jesus Christ was dead and alive again by 33. You better get crackin'.
Now you're an accomplice to murder. Everything you thought you had control of has gone out the window or is currently dripping down your leg.
Jake  So, I'm dead...
In one hour, I want to know where she eats, where she sleeps, the name of her kindergarten teacher, everything.
The Vietnam War was fought over a bet that Howard Hughes lost to Aristotle Onassis.
This guy's a restraining order waiting to happen.
Have you ever been a place where hope was gone? Where all that's left is patience?
I am an American citizen, and I demand to see Alice Sutton.
If you could remember who stabbed you with the wheelchair, and where it happened it would really help.
See this aluminum-looking stuff? It's firewall. It's amazing. The guy designed this place so it could be an incinerator, but it leaves the rest of the building untouched.
Why me, Gabriel? It's personal, isn't it? I didn't go to church enough, I didn't pray enough, I... was five bucks short in the collection plate. Why?
That's really not going to help.
You are going to die young because you smoked 30 cigarettes a day since you were 15... and you're going to go to **** because of the life you took.  You're ******.
No. You will live, John Constantine. You will live so you will have the chance to prove that your soul truly belongs in ****. Oh, you will live. You will live.
He always had a rotten sense of humor. And His punchlines are killers.
You don't walk off the roof of a building, without leaving something behind.
Officially, I was dead for two minutes... but when you cross over, time stops. Take it from me, two minutes in **** is a lifetime.
Yeah, what do you want? An extension?
This is Constantine. John Constantine. *******.
Hey, buddy, got a light?
I know I'm not one of your favorites. I'm not even welcome in your house. But, I could use a little attention.
CQ, this is W9GFO, do you copy?  Dad, this is Ellie, come back?... This is Eleanor Arroway, transmitting on 14.2 megahertz.  Dad, are you there? Come back? Dad, are you there? Dad, this is Ellie...
Small moves, Ellie, small moves.
CQ, this is W9GFO. CQ, this is W9GFO here. Come back?
Mathematics is the only true universal language.
Is the world fundamentally a better place because of science and technology? We shop at home, we surf the Web... at the same time, we feel emptier, lonelier and more cut off from each other than at any other time in human history...
Do you believe in God, Dr. Arroway?
My coalition's phone lines have been flooded with calls from concerned families, wondering if this message signifies the end of the world or the advent of the rapture. We feel that U.S. policy in this matter wants to be extremely conservative - if there's any chance of danger or threat to our way of life perhaps the message and its contents should simply be disregarded.
Those are primes! 2,3,5,7, those are all prime numbers and there's no way that's a natural phenomenon!
Dr. Arroway. You come to us with no evidence, no record, no artifacts, only a story that, to put it mildly, strains credibility. Over half a trillion dollars was spent. Dozens of lives were lost. Are you really gonna sit there and tell us we should just take this all on faith?
That's my darling Luke. He grins like a baby but bites like a gator.
You run one time, you got yourself a set of chains. You run twice you got yourself two sets. You ain't gonna need no third set, 'cause you gonna get your mind right.
Ya know, sometimes I wished people was like dogs, Luke.
What we got here is... failure to communicate.
Look Cap'n, look what he done to Blue. He's dead, he's dead. he run himself plum to death.
Is that your answer, old man? Well, I guess you're a hard case too.
Any man playing grabass or fightin' in the building spends a night in the box.
What we've got here is... failure to communicate. Some men you just can't reach. So you get what we had here last week, which is the way he wants it... well, he gets it. I don't like it any more than you men.
Alright, stand back you pedestrians, this ain't no automobile accident.
Whoa! Check out Slug-zilla!
You think they're trying to poison me?
You're in terrible danger, girl!
Don't remember our names, but I 'member my true mommy.
You may come out... when you've learned to be a loving daughter!
Crazy? You're the jerk wad that gave me the doll!
I wanna hug yo' face!
I am the Amazing Bobinsky! But you- call me Mr. B. Because, amazing, I already know that I am.
He's not drunk, Mom, he's just eccentric.
Makin' up a song about Coraline/ She's a peach, she's a doll, she's a pal of mine/ She's as cute as a button in the eyes of everyone who's ever laid their eyes on Coraline/ When she comes around exploring/ Mom and I will never ever make it boring/ Our eyes will be on Coraline!
So sharp, you won't feel a thing...
How dare you disobey your mother!
Be clever, Miss. Even if you win, she'll never let you go!
Hush, and shush, for the beldam might be listening.
They say even the proudest spirit can be broken... with love.
I don't like rats at the best of times, but this one was sounding an alarm.
T'ain't all bad, miss. Thou art alive. Thou art still liviing.
I can't believe it. You and Dad get paid to write about plants, and you hate dirt.
I thought you'd like him more if he talked a little less. So I fixed him.
What are you, some kind of kung fu James Bond?
Jesus. Nothing's easy.
If you stop, you die!
How'd you like that one, tough guy? How fricking awesome was that, huh?
I'm going to get that little ****** if it's the last thing I do.  It may actually be the last thing I do.
I wonder how many steaks I could make out of you?
You haven't been tight since your brother ****** you in third grade.
I'm gonna kick some black ***!
Well, I'm glad to hear that. Listen, I've been fatally poisoned, there's probably a psychopath heading over there to torture and kill you as we speak, but don't bother getting out of bed, I'll be there in a flash... Maybe you could fry me up a waffle or something, kay?
I told you I'd kill you, you little *****!
I forgot to take my Birth-Control Pills!
Don't worry. That guy's gotta see us. Don't worry. That guy's gotta see us... These were the confident last words of the brilliant, young Hollywood star James Dean as he piloted his Porsche 550 Spyder race car toward a date with death along a lonely stretch of California two-lane blacktop Route 466... Don't worry that guy's gotta see us. The year... 1955. The day... September 30. The time... Now. The first star of our show is Little *******. James Dean's racing Porsche. He named it after himself and had his racing number - 130 - painted on it.
I myself shall play the role of Dean's racing mechanic Rolf Voudrich, sent over from the Porsche factory in Zuffenhausen, Germany. Now, this mechanic was himself fated to die in a car crash in Germany 26 years later.
After being bombarded endlessly by road safety propaganda, almost a relief to have found myself in an actual accident.
Zero does not care about your life story.
No smoking, no drinking? What kind of country is this?
A faithful heart makes wishes come true.
I'm not an enigma, just a contradiction.
Hang on tightly, let go lightly.
Welcome back Jack, to the house of addiction.
You're my conscience.
I understand if you don't, but I hope that you do.
Chapter 13. It's all numbers, the croupier thought. Spin of the wheel, turn of the card, time of your life, date of your birth, year of your death. In the book of Numbers the Lord said, "Thou shall count thy steps."
Without hope there's no point to anything.
The world breaks everyone, and afterwards many are strong at the broken places. But those that will not break, it kills - it kills the very good, and the very gentle, and the very brave, impartially. If you are none of these, you can be sure it will kill you, too, but there will be no special hurry.
Chapter 3. His existence was forming an interesting of pattern of betrayals. Sometimes he was unsure whether he was the betrayer or the betrayed.
I hate it when things don't go my way. It makes me so horny.
We've done some pretty ****** up **** in our time but this... I mean, we're destroying an innocent girl. You do realize that?
I don't know. Relationships seem too distracting. I'd rather concentrate on my studies.
E-mail is for geeks and pedophiles.
"I love you"? My God. You are completely *****-whipped.
I'm tired and emotional.
Have you ever tried to pick up your teeth with broken fingers?
Go back to your banana tree, ******.
See, I'm not a young thing anymore.
You're telling me telethon boy is a genius?
Kazan! Get out through the door!
*You* figure it out! You haven't done anything! All you do is freak out, you murderer!
I'm not dying in a ******* rat maze!
This room is... green. I wanna go back to the blue room.
Hey! Listen to what I'm saying. We haven't been moving in circles, the rooms have.
Prime numbers. I can't believe I didn't see it before!
Dances With Wolves! I am Wind In His Hair. Do you see that I am your friend? Can you see that you will always be my friend?
You rest easy, son. You'll keep your leg, as God is my judge, you'll keep it.
Guns would make one warrior like two.
I am Lieutenant John J. Dunbar and this is my post.
Nothing I have been told about these people is correct. They are not thieves or beggars. They are not the bogeymen they are made out to be. On the contrary, they are polite guest and I enjoy their humor.
Spivy! You bash that prisoner one more time, I'll put those shackles on YOU!
If it wasn't for my companion, I believe I'd be having the time of my life.
I had never really known who John Dunbar was. Perhaps because the name itself had no meaning. But as I heard my Sioux name being called over and over, I knew for the first time who I really was.
My name is Dances with Wolves. I have nothing to say to you. You are not worth talking to.
Some of the boys are saying that if we ain't gonna fight we could just settle the whole business with a little high stakes poker. Wouldn't that be a sight... a bunch of fellas sitting in the middle of this field drawing cards...
There ain't nothing here lieutenant.
Sir knight? I've just ****** in my pants... and nobody can do anything about it.
The strangeness of this life cannot be measured: in trying to produce my own death, I was elevated to the status of a living hero.
I was just thinking that of all the trails in this life there is one that matters most. It is the trail of a true human being. I think you are on this trail and it is good to see.
Turned *****, didn't yeh.
It was hard to know how to feel. I had never been in a battle like this one. This had not been a fight for territory or riches or to make men free. This battle had no ego. It had been fought to preserve the food stores that would see us through winter, to protect the lives of women and children and loved ones only a few feet away. I felt a pride I had never felt before.
Bomb, this is Lt. Doolittle. You are *not* to detonate in the bomb bay. I repeat, you are NOT to detonate in the bomb bay!
You know, I wish I had my board with me... even if I could just wax it once in a while.
Don't give me any of that intelligent life ****, just give me something I can blow up
You truly are one ugly son of a *****!
He's a cockroach; first you think you kill him and he pops right back up again!
The name isn't Buddy, it's Durant. Robert G. Durant.
What you don't want to eat is donuts. No donuts.
Look, I'll make this easy for you. I barely see him anymore. I barely know him anymore. I'd just kind of like to know where he is.
Who was she, Bill? Another "patriotic" secretary?
Why couldn't you die from a stroke like everyone else?
There's no mistake, Bill. When you veto someone's funding that is not a mistake. When you hurt someone intentionally that is not a mistake.
Your sister keep you warm at night, does she?
Welton Academy, hello. Yes he is, just a moment. Mr. Nolan, it's for you. It's God. He says we should have girls at Welton.
This is a battle, a war, and the casualties could be your hearts and souls.
I'm exercising the right not to walk.
It's not the Bible, you're not gonna go to **** for this.
Sucking the marrow out of life doesn't mean choking on the bone.
O Captain, my Captain. Who knows where that comes from? Anybody? Not a clue? It's from a poem by Walt Whitman about Mr. Abraham Lincoln. Now in this class you can either call me Mr. Keating, or if you're slightly more daring, O Captain my Captain.
Phone call from God. If it had been collect, that would have been daring!
For the first time in my whole life, I know what I wanna do! And for the first time, I'm gonna do it! Whether my father wants me to or not! Carpe diem!
I was good. I was really good.
Mr. Anderson! Don't think that I don't know that this assignment scares the **** out of you, you mole!
Now, don't just walk off the edge like lemmings! Look around you!
You're in the club! Being in the club means being stirred up by things! You look about as stirred up as a cesspool!
Mr. Meeks, time to inherit the earth.
If I don't ask him, at least I won't be disobeying him.
Next time I see you, you die.
We don't read and write poetry because it's cute. We read and write poetry because we are members of the human race. And the human race is filled with passion. And medicine, law, business, engineering, these are noble pursuits and necessary to sustain life. But poetry, beauty, romance, love, these are what we stay alive for. To quote from Whitman, "O me! O life!... of the questions of these recurring; of the endless trains of the faithless... of cities filled with the foolish; what good amid these, O me, O life?" Answer. That you are here - that life exists, and identity; that the powerful play goes on and you may contribute a verse. That the powerful play *goes on* and you may contribute a verse. What will your verse be?
Hey Neal, business as usual huh? I heard you got the new kid. He looks like a stiff!  Oops!
Thank you, boys. Thank you.
Boys, you must strive to find your own voice. Because the longer you wait to begin, the less likely you are to find it at all. Thoreau said, "Most men lead lives of quiet desperation." Don't be resigned to that. Break out!
They're not that different from you, are they? Same haircuts. Full of hormones, just like you. Invincible, just like you feel. The world is their oyster. They believe they're destined for great things, just like many of you, their eyes are full of hope, just like you. Did they wait until it was too late to make from their lives even one iota of what they were capable? Because, you see gentlemen, these boys are now fertilizing daffodils. But if you listen real close, you can hear them whisper their legacy to you. Go on, lean in. Listen, you hear it? - - Carpe - - hear it? - - Carpe, carpe diem, seize the day boys, make your lives extraordinary.
My father was an exceptional man...
What are you doing in my dad's coffin?
You better grow eyes in the back of your head, you horned piece of ****, because I'm not gonna sleep until worms are crawling up your foam-rubber ***! I'm goin' on safari ************! SAH-FAR-I!
If you rat on the Parade of Hope, you'll be lucky to find your toenails. These guys are the roughest of all the charities.
I'm Rainbow ******* Randolph!
Okay, I'm gonna go take a dump!
You just ****** with the wrong rhino!
Are you free tonight?
They've gotten a bad name 'cause, uh, I mean, there's a limited market for Parkinson's disease.
With dreams begin responsibilities.
You mean we're all gonna die 'cause you ******* up on the math?
Merciful God, we commit our friends - Ben Zion and Krensky - to You. We have no more prayers, no more tears; we have run out of blood. Choose another people. We have paid for each of Your commandments; we have covered every stone and field with ashes. Sanctify another land. Choose another people. Teach them the deeds and the prophesies. Grant us but one more blessing: take back the gift of our holiness. Amen.
Yes. You annoy me, therefore I exist.
You are a savage creature John Spartan, and I wish for you to leave my domicile now!
Hey Luke Skywalker, use the force.
Mellow greetings. What seems to be your boggle?
You're gonna regret this the rest of your life... both seconds of it.
You are even better live than on Laserdisc!
Somebody put me back in the fridge.
Why don't you just shove a leash up my ***?
I must've done something right in a previous life. Can't imagine what that could've been.
****, I'm possessed! Wonder if I can play the accordion too...
Wait a minute, this is the future. Where are all the phaser guns?
Only a car full of Stellas and Guidos would ride your *** on a 2-lane highway and honk.
Will you guys quit the mom-bashing? I mean, look, look, Lex's mom is cool because she lets us spend the night, and if it wasn't for your mom, Trip, we wouldn't have smoked that fine Panama Red last night! So, leave the women who gave you life out of it, they're both cool in my book.
A tease? What the **** did I do to tease you mongoloids?
Oh, yeah, *STELLA*! And we'll deserve it too, won't we? But you know what I'm gonna do? I'm gonna make it *really* worth their while!
BETH? Are you waiting for a confession? I thought you were Jewish?
Save your money, stud-muffin. The lady at the end of the bar sends her love.
Tear these grease monkeys a new *******!  One step out of that office, and your asses are Alpo!
Oh, God, God if you get me out of this, I swear, I will never pull my pork again!
Christine stole it! Asleep, my ***. The Stella booted with your mom's wheels.
What the **** are you doin' Sister Gonorrhea, waitin' for a bus?
Now there's an intelligently biting remark wrought with wit and irony.
God forbid one day you have a son like you, Jeremiah. A boy who lies through his teeth, buys demonic records, and smokes the dope!
Christine? Christine! You googatz in the head or something? We are on the side of the freakin' highway!
It is about time, that you gave up that STUPID dream of yours, once and for all! No son of mine is gonna be a career musician... ever, ever, EVER!
Okay, dope-burnout, let's get one thing straight, here. As far as I'm concerned, good tunes is good tunes. Be it disco or rock, or polka, or whatever have you, regardless of the category. Disco is just easier to dance to.
You just upset the Incredible Hulk, his idiot half brother, and the two circus clowns.
Hey, thanks for letting us use your make-up supply. You must have the entire Revlon factory in your purse, you greasy disco ball!
A man once told me that you step out of your door in the morning, and you are already in trouble. The only question is are you on top of that trouble or not?
A woman's shoulders are the front lines of her mystique, and her neck, if she's alive, has all the mystery of a border town. A no-man's land in that battle between the mind and the body.
Don't get too cocky my boy. No matter how good you are don't ever let them see you coming. That's the gaffe my friend. You gotta keep yourself small. Innocuous. Be the little guy. You know, the nerd... the leper... ****-kickin' surfer. Look at me.  Underestimated from day one. You'd never think I was a master of the universe, now would ya?
Let me give you a little inside information about God. God likes to watch. He's a prankster. Think about it. He gives man instincts. He gives you this extraordinary gift, and then what does He do, I swear for His own amusement, his own private, cosmic gag reel, He sets the rules in opposition. It's the goof of all time. Look but don't touch. Touch, but don't taste. Taste, don't swallow. Ahaha. And while you're jumpin' from one foot to the next, what is he doing? He's laughin' His sick, ******' *** off! He's a tight-***! He's a ******! He's an absentee landlord! Worship that? NEVER!
The worst vice is advice.
Walter, as your lawyer I'm advising you to stay the **** away from me.
Behold I send you out as sheep amidst the wolves.
All right, listen up guys. 'Twas the night before Christmas, and all through the house, not a creature was stirring, except... the four assholes coming in the rear in standard two-by-two cover formation.
I wanted this to be professional, efficient, adult, cooperative. Not a lot to ask. Alas, your Mr. Takagi did not see it that way... so he won't be joining us for the rest of his life. We can go any way you want it. You can walk out of here or be carried out. But have no illusions. We are in charge. So, decide now, each of you. And please remember: we have left nothing to chance.
Due to the Nakatomi Corporation's legacy of greed around the globe, they are about to be taught a lesson in the real use of power. You will be witnesses.
You should have heard your brother squeal when I broke his ******* neck.
Just remember that when you sign for the tip.
When they touch down, we'll blow the roof, they'll spend a month sifting through rubble, and by the time they figure out what went wrong, we'll be sitting on a beach, earning twenty percent.
Hey babe, I negotiate million dollar deals for breakfast. I think I can handle this Eurotrash.
Mr. Takagi, I could talk about industrialization and men's fashion all day, but I'm afraid work must intrude, and my associate, Theo, has some questions for you. Sort of fill in the blanks questions, actually.
Wait a minute, wait a minute. What have we here, gentlemen? The police have themselves an RV. Southeast corner.
C'mon baby, come ta' papa, I'll kiss ya' ******' dalmatian.
Why the **** didn't you stop 'em, John? 'Cause then you'd be dead, too, *******.
Got invited to the Christmas party by mistake. Who knew?
The circuits that cannnot be cut are cut automatically in response to a terrorist incident. You asked for miracles, Theo, I give you the FBI.
Authorization? How about the United States ******* government? Lose the grid, or you lose your job.
The fire has been called off, my friend. No one is coming to help you. You might as well come out and join the others. I promise I won't hurt you.
No one kills him but me!
Welcome to the party, pal.
Nine million terrorists in the world and I gotta kill one with feet smaller than my sister.
Mrs. McClane. How nice to make your acquaintance.
We are both professionals. This is personal.
That's either the creepiest... or the sweetest thing I have ever heard.
Yes, concentrate. Now this one's for the gold.
It's alright I'm green! I'm green!
Yes, children, this is the cool-out corner. We're slowing it down for all the lovers in the house. I'll be giving you all the help you need. Musically, that is.
Extra Cheese is two dollars.
Whoa. Y'all take a chill. You got to cool that **** off. And that's the double-truth, Ruth.
Hey, Sal, how come they ain't no brothas on the wall?
He won't listen to anybody. He's been very crazy all summer. Since June he's been trying to kill me.
Not born. **** into existence.
All lines are currently down.
White folks only want to hear the good ****: life eternal, a place in God's Heaven. But as soon as they hear they're getting this good **** from a black Jesus, they freak. And that, my friends, is called hypocrisy. A black man can steal your stereo, but he can't be your Savior.
Very basic strategy. If your enemies know where you are, then don't be there.
Mr. McGee, don't blame me. You wouldn't like me while I'm angry.
See? I'm as anatomically impaired as a Ken doll.
Consequences schmonsequences.
You gotta be kidding me.
Good Lord, the little stoner's got a point.
I feel like I'm Han Solo, and you're Chewie, and she's Ben Kenobi, and we're in that ******-up bar.
I'm supposed to be in it. I was the thirteenth apostle.
Metatron acts as the voice of God. Any documented occasion when some yahoo claims God has spoken to them, they're speaking to me. Or they're talking to themselves.
Do you know what makes a human being decent? Fear. And therein lies the problem. None of you has anything left to fear anymore. You rest comfortably in seats of inscrutable power, hiding behind your false idol, far from judgment, lives shrouded in secrecy even from one another. But not from God.
So do you do anal? Is it true that chicks **** if you blast 'em in the ***?
Your hard-on for smiting has prevented us from negotiating what should be the relatively simple matter of catching or staying on a bus.
Glick's the kind of ******* that would bless his own clubs for a better game.
That's what you get, Mother ******!
Heh, me lead you? Lady look at me, I don't even know where the **** I am half the time!
No wonder he saw Jesus. Homey's rockin' the ganj.
So, Jay tells us you're gonna sleep with him.
People die for it, people kill for it. The whole of existence is in jeopardy right now, because of the Catholic belief structure, regarding this plenary indulgence ********. Bartlteby and Loki, whether they know it or not, are exploiting that belief. And if they're successful, you and me, all of this, ends in a heartbeat. All in a belief.
You know death is a worry of the living. The dead like myself only worry about decay and necrophiliacs.
You people. If there isn't a movie about it, it's not worth knowing, is it?
I should let you know that Mr Heiss will only be available to meet for about five minutes, so we should hurry up and cut to the point. Um, and speak in short sentences because he has the attention span of a ferret on crystal meth.
I've been training since I was twelve. Knives, guns, throwing stars. You name it, and I can fight with it. I'm a hard worker. I'm a hard worker and a fast learner. Nothing scares me. I'm not afraid to die.
To say that Choco is the product of a broken home is to presume a home existed in the first place. No. Choco never had a home, well, not unless you count the ten or so juvenile correction facilities where he spent his child hood.
Absolutely brilliant.
I'm gonna fill up the tank and grab a Mountain Dew. Don't make a peep. Especially you, Barbara.
I got cancer of the prick.
If anything should happen to me... make sure Annette gets the car.
I think I just **** my pants.
How much money did you give that guy? A wiseguy never pays for his drinks.
This famous linguist once said that of all the phrases in the English language, of all the endless combinations of words in all of history, that Cellar Door is the most beautiful.
What if you could go back in time, and take all those hours of pain and darkness and replace them with something better?
Not only am I a teacher, but I am also the mother of a Middlesex child. Therefore, I am the only person here who transcends the parent-teacher bridge.
28 days... 6 hours... 42 minutes... 12 seconds. That... is when the world... will end.
I'm voting for Dukakis.
Every creature on this earth dies alone.
Ling Ling finds a wallet on the ground filled with money. She takes the wallet to the address on the driver's license but keeps the money inside the wallet.  I-I'm sorry Mrs. Farmer. I don't get this.
Some people are just born with tragedy in their blood.
You are a fear prisoner. Yes, you are a product of fear.
Excuse me. You need to go back to grad school.
I promise, that one day, everything's going to be better for you.
"No duh" is a product of fear.
Is that all the gusta you can musta?
Hey, porky pig, I hope you get molested.
Donnie, an atheist is someone who denies altogether the existence of God. You're an agnostic. An agnostic is someone who believes that there can be no proof of the existence of God, but does not deny the possibility that God exists.
Go Back to China, *****.
If the sky were to suddenly open up, there would be no law, there would be no rule. There would only be you and your memories.
They say right when they flood the house and they tear it to shreds that... destruction is a form of creation," so the fact that they burn the money is ironic. They just want to see what happens when they tear the world apart. They want to change things.
And did you stop and think that maybe infants need darkness? That maybe darkness is part of their natural environment?
A storm is coming, Frank says / A storm that will swallow the children / And I will deliver them from the kingdom of pain / I will deliver the children back the their doorsteps / And send the monsters back to the underground / I'll send them back to a place where no-one else can see them / Except for me / Because I am Donnie Darko.
Well, I get darn sick of tryin' to pick up after a gang of fast-talking salesmen dumb enough to sell life insurance to a guy who sleeps in the same bed with four rattlesnakes.
Who'd you think I was anyway? The guy that walks into a good looking dame's front parlour and says, "Good afternoon, I sell accident insurance on husbands... you got one that's been around too long? One you'd like to turn into a little hard cash?"
It's just like the first time I came here, isn't it? We were talking about automobile insurance, only you were thinking about murder. And I was thinking about that anklet.
I picked you for the job, not because I think you're so darn smart, but because I thought you were a shade less dumb than the rest of the outfit. Guess I was wrong. You're not smarter, Walter... you're just a little taller.
That was all there was to it.Nothing had slipped, nothing had been overlooked.There was nothing to give us away. And yet, Keyes, as I was walking down the street to the drugstore, suddenly, it came over me that everything would go wrong. It sounds crazy Keyes, but it's true, so help me, I couldn't hear my own footsteps. It was the walk of a dead man.
Now look, Walter. A guy takes out an accident policy that's worth $100,000 if he's killed on the train. Then, two weeks later, he *is* killed on the train. And, not from the train accident, mind you, but falling off some silly observation car. You know what the mathematical probability of that is? One out of, oh, I don't know how many billions. And after that, the broken leg. No, it just, it just can't be the way it looks. Something has been worked on us!
Do I laugh now, or wait 'til it gets funny?
Well, hello there, Mr. Neff.
I get the general idea. She was a tramp from a long line of tramps.
Walter, you're all washed up.
That's a honey of an anklet you're wearing, Mrs. Dietrichson.
I don't want your cat, you dirty pork queen!
And get your filthy pig knuckle off my desk!
You'd be surprised what you'll be willing to do, when the Lamia comes for you.
I desire the SOUL of Christine Brown. We will FEAST upon it while she festers in the grave!
I beat you, you old *****!
It's a shield. I made it. Might keep the fire off of you, might not. You know, you're an idiot. You're going to die tonight. You'll be ripped, limb from limb. This is the last time I'll ever speak to you!
Unclean beast! Get thee down! Be thou consumed by the fires that made thee!
My lord Ulrich is no longer. All that you asked of him, you may now expect of me. The dangers he would face, I will now conquer. The task he would undertake, I will now fulfill. I'm Galen Brandwarden, inheritor of Ulrich's craft and knowledge, and I am the sorcerer you seek.
If he's ready to lay a dragon in its grave, he's nothing to fear from me.
All hail Casiodorus Rex, dragonslayer!
I shoved your tap shoes in my panties before I was blown out of the house. You go find the guy who cut 'em off.
Beautiful as a whore's *** today, huh, boys?
You'd think they'd build the parking lot of America to go with the Mall of America!
I'd have good strong roots in a town like Mt. Rose, a solid Christian trunk, and long, leafy branches to provide shade for handicapped kids on a hot summer day.
******' beauty queens blowing chunks everywhere. I-I've never seen anything like it before, and I live in L.A.
With one week to go before the pageant, I was finishing my outfit, rehearsing my talent, brushing up on current events, and running 18 miles a day on about 400 calories. I was ready.
Oh, Yeah, Frida, sure. She was the oldest living Lutheran. Now she's dead as a doornail. It's them **** Shriner's, won't take down the God **** sign the lazy sons of *******. Every year, every **** year I tell them, "Take down the God **** Frida sign, you lazy sons of *******!"
Why? Well, ah, it's kind of like askin' why all the guys chew Copenhagen, you know? I mea - If you're 17, and you're not a total fry, it's just what you do.
Yah, my ma's clothes all melted onto mine forming, like, this big polyester meteor in our closet, y'know? But, in some kinda weird miracle, our neighbor boy, Kenny Hanson, found my tap costume on the roof o' their trailer while he was settin' coon traps for his dad. Here's the weird part: it was still on the hanger.
They're never gonna let you perform naked, I asked!
And so, dear Lord, it is with deep sadness that we turn over to you this young woman, whose dream to ride on a giant swan resulted in her death. Maybe it is your way of telling us... to buy American.
English! Speak Engrish, you stupid rittle ******!
Here's your paint can. And the next time you drink window cleaner, I'm just gonna leave it in you!
I chose Mount Rushmore. 'Cause to live in a country where you can take an ugly old mountain and put faces on it, faces of great Americans who did so much to make our country super great. Well, that makes me Rebecca Leeman, proud to be an American.
I don't eat shellfish. Mom always says, "Don't ever eat nothin' that can carry its house around with it. Who knows the last time it's been cleaned." She should know.
I can sum up our entire philosophy with this glass. I can look at it and say it's half-full, which in the beauty pageant biz means "Where the hell's my waiter?"
Hi. I'm Amber Atkins, and I'm signing up cause uh my two favorite people in the whole world competed in pageants: my mom and Diane Sawyer... Course, I hope I end up a little more like Diane Sawyer than my mom.
If any form of pleasure is exhibited, report to me and it will be prohibited! I'll put my foot down, so shall it be... this is the land of the free! The last man nearly ruined this place he didn't know what to do with it. If you think this country's bad off now, just wait till I get through with it! The country's taxes must be fixed, and I know what to do with it. If you think you're paying too much now, just wait till I get through with it!
Yeah. I like a woman with some meat on her bones.
I can turn all the faucets on in my house. Even the hose.
Who is the little one, a pet perhaps? Will she deserve my special attentions?
I must not fear. Fear is the mind-killer. Fear is the little-death that brings total obliteration. I will face my fear. I will permit it to pass over me and through me. And when my fear is gone I will turn and face fear's path, and only I will remain.
Some thoughts have a certain sound, that being the equivalent to a form. Through sound and motion, you will be able to paralyze nerves, shatter bones, set fires, suffocate an enemy or burst his organs. We will kill until no Harkonnen breathes Arakeen air.
I'll miss the sea, but a person needs new experiences. They jar something deep inside, allowing him to grow. Without change something sleeps inside us, and seldom awakens. The sleeper must awaken.
Why are you going to prolong the inevitable? I will kill you!
Behold, as a wild *** in the desert, go I forth to my work.
You are SO beautiful, my Baron. Your skin, love to me. Your diseases lovingly cared for, for all eternity.
My name is a killing word.
You have no need for your weapons with me, Gurney Halleck.
Father... father, the sleeper has awakened!
Long live the fighters!
Put the pick in there, Pete, and turn it 'round real neat.
And how can this be? For he is the Kwisatz Haderach!
It is by will alone I set my mind in motion. It is by the juice of Sapho that thoughts acquire speed, the lips acquire stains, stains become a warning. It is by will alone I set my mind in motion.
Bring in that floating fat man, the Baron!
Bless the maker and his water, bless the coming and going of him, may his passing cleanse the world.
Tell me of your homeworld, Usul.
Stay alive a little longer.
Semyon recommends this place for business meetings, because you can see what tattoos a man has. Come on, we have a lot to cover. Let's cook.
My name is Tatiana. My father died in the mines in my village, so he was already buried when he died. We were all buried there. Buried under the soil of Russia. That is why I left, to find a better life.
Sometimes, if things are closed, you just, open them up.
He is no driver, he is the undertaker.
Kirill, we don't kill little babies.
Forget any of this happened. Stay away from people like me.
Okay. Now I'm going to do his teeth and cut off his fingers. You might want to leave room.
Sentimental value? Ah. I heard of that.
I will need my spectacles and a clear head. Today I broke my rules and I drank vodka. Tomorrow I will translate it, and then I will bring what I've done to your home.
Anger is dangerous. It makes people do stupid things.
So, you know where I am...and now I know where you are, Anna Ivanovna.
We don't have a permit. Run!
Oh, what does that old queen know?
This is the one. 'This' is the one I'll be remembered for.
Children! I love children.
Home? I have no home. Haunted... despised... living like an animal. The jungle is my home! But I will show the world that I can be its master. I shall perfect my own race of people... a race of atomic supermen that will conquer the world!
This story's gonna grab people. It's about this guy, he's crazy about this girl, but he likes to wear dresses. Should he tell her? Should he not tell her? He's torn, Georgie. This is drama.
They're driving me CRAZY. These Baptists are stupid. Stupid. STUPID.
Greetings, my friends! You are interested in the unknown. The mysterious. The unexplainable. That is why you are here. And now, for the first time, we are bringing you the full story of what happened. We are giving you all the evidence based only on the secret testimony of the miserable souls who survived this terrifying ordeal. The incidents, faces. My friends, we cannot keep this a secret any longer. Can your heart stand the shocking facts of the true story of Edward D. Wood Jr.?
Are you people insane? I'm the director. I make the casting decisions around here.
I'm not getting near that goddamn thing. One of them burned me in "The Return of Chandu".
They don't want the classic horror films anymore. Today it's all giant bugs. Giant spiders, giant grasshoppers... Who will believe such nonsense?
I refuse to drive in this country. Too many madmen.
Well, I see the usual cast of misfits and dope addicts are here.
Eddie, we're in show biz. It's all about razzle-dazzle. Appearances. If you look good, and you talk well, people will swallow anything.
I think she's a honey. Look at those jugs.
Look, Ed, you put *anybody* on television sixteen hours a day, and sooner or later they're going to fall off a table and land on a cat.
How about it, Edward? Is there some special lady in your life?
I know a doctor who might be able to help you.
Don't be ridiculous! You're not handicapped, you're... What do they call the... exceptional? My name's Joyce, and I noticed that you have not tasted any of the ambrosia salad that I made especially for you. Allow me.
We're looking for the man with the hands.
You see, before he came down here, it never snowed. And afterwards, it did. If he weren't up there now... I don't think it would be snowing. Sometimes you can still catch me dancing in it.
One chop to a guy's neck, and it's all over.
I know it is a little early for Christmas, Edward, but; I have a present for you.
Snuggle in, sweetie. It's cold out there.
Forget about holding her hand, man. Think about the damage he could do to other places.
He has been sent first to tempt you. But it's not too late. You must push him from you, expel him! Trample down the perversion of nature!
All along I felt in my gut there was something wrong with him.
I can't eat that, he used his hands. I think it's unsanitary.
You want to see the pictures? All right. Well, this is my husband Bill. He's a bowling champion. Do you know what bowling is? Bowling? No. Well... here they are down at the lake, fishing. I think Kevin looks a little glum because they didn't catch anything that day. And, um... here's my daughter Kim. All dressed for the junior prom. She's a senior now, if you can believe it! She's camping in the mountains with some friends... but she'll be back in a few days. And you can meet her then. Isn't she beautiful. That's my family. Now, come along dear. I'll show you the rest of the house. Then you can just freshen up and make yourself at home. That's the kitchen over there. You help yourself to anything you want to eat or drink. Those are grapes. And, um... back here are the bedrooms. Let me get you some towels and I'll see what we can find for you to wear. You know what? I think I have some of Bill's old clothes in here. This is perfect! Here.These should just fit you.  Oh! Oh no, don't be alarmed. That's just the phone. Now you can go in Kim's room and put these on, and I'll be right with you.
Eddie. The guys and I were talking, we'd like want to invite you to our card game on Friday night. Would you like that? Only thing is, you can't cut!
Hello? Hello? Hello? Avon calling. Oh, my. Hello? Hello? I'm Peg Boggs. I'm your local Avon representative. Hello? I... I'm sorry to barge in like this, but you don't have any reason to be afraid. Ooh! This is some huge house, isn't it? Thank goodness for those aerobics... classes. Hello? Hello?
Sweetheart, you can't buy the necessities of life with cookies.
The light concealing cream goes on first. Then you blend, and blend, and blend. Blending is the secret.
Good morning, Azul. Know who this is?
If you died right now, I would throw myself under one of my Dad's cement trucks so I could be poured into your tomb.
When I think back on my relationship with Mr. Novotny, what I miss most... is our talks.
You gonna do it? Come on. Fill me up! Come on! Fill me up! Yeah! Good job!
Sometimes when I'm sad, I sit and watch the power station. They say if you lie between two of the main wires, your body just evaporates... you become a gas. I wonder what that would feel like.
Who cares about this stupid election? We all know it doesn't matter who gets elected president of Carver. Do you really think it's going to change anything around here; make one single person smarter or happier or nicer? The only person it does matter to is the one who gets elected. The same pathetic charade happens every year, and everyone makes the same pathetic promises just so they can put it on their transcripts to get into college. So vote for me, because I don't even want to go to college, and I don't care, and as president I won't do anything. The only promise I will make is that if elected I will immediately dismantle the student government, so that none of us will ever have to sit through one of these stupid assemblies again!  Or don't vote for me... who cares? Don't vote at all!
I don't know what you're referring to, but maybe if certain older, wiser people hadn't acted like such little babies, and gotten so mushy, then everything would be ok... and I think certain older people, like you, and your colleague, shouldn't be leching after their students, especially when some of them can't even get their own wives pregnant... and they certainly shouldn't be making slanderous accusations, especially when certain young, naive peoples' mothers are paralegal secretaries at the cities biggest law firm, and have won many successful law suits, and if you want to keep questioning me like this, I won't continue without my attorney present.
None of this would have happened if Mr. McAllister hadn't meddled the way he did. He should have just accepted things as they are instead of trying to interfere with destiny. You see, you can't interfere with destiny. That's why it's destiny. And if you try to interfere, the same thing's going to happen anyway, and you'll just suffer.
I sure was surprised the day Lisa Flanagan asked me for a ride home and ended up blowing me.
Her ***** gets so wet you can't believe it.
Mr.McAllister. Mr.McAllister. Somebody's torn down my poster. It's not fair. Can I get an A? Can I get a recommendation? Can I? Can I? **** them.
Good morning, Mr. M. Looks like you could use a CUPCAKE!
Larry, we're not electing the ******* Pope here. Just tell me who won.
The sight of Tracy at that moment affected me in a way I can't fully explain. Part of it was that she was spying; but mostly it was her face. Who knew how high she would climb in life? How many people would suffer because of her? I had to stop her... now!
There's something you could do for me - something I have not known for a very long time. But it's not to be spoken of afterwards. It must be forgotten. But just for now, a kiss?  I die.
We mortals have many weaknesses; we feel too much, hurt too much or too soon we die, but we do have the chance of love.
Majesty, this is not the Queen I love and serve.
May we have wisdom not to fear shadows in the night, and courage when the day of danger truly dawns.
Why be afraid of tomorrow when today is all we have?
The puddle man is outside, Majesty.
I like your immensities. Your ocean is an image of Eternity, I think. Such great spaces make us small. Do we discover the New World, Mr. Raleigh, or does it discover us?
I will not be a toy of the fates! Have I not faced an assassin's bullet and lived?
We all know that if I fall you all come tumbling down with me.
I have never known a woman like you.
You were right, I was wrong, but this is not the time for the 'I told you so' speech.
If you live another day I will be very impressed.
The government's been in bed with the entire telecommunications industry since the forties. They've infected everything. They get into your bank statements, computer files, email, listen to your phone calls... Every wire, every airwave. The more technology used, the easier it is for them to keep tabs on you. It's a brave new world out there. At least it'd better be.
Well, this looks like the end of a terrible friendship.
Everyone stay calm! This is not happening!
First we're flying - now we're sinking!
Ed, have a ******* cup of coffee.
I don't need pity, I need a paycheck. And I've looked. But when you've spent the past six years raising babies its real hard to find somebody who pays worth a ****, are ya getting every word of this down honey or am I talking too fast?
Look, I don't know **** about **** but I know right from wrong!
Annabelle Daniels: 714-454-9346. 10 years old, 11 in May. Lived on the plume since birth. Wanted to be a synchronized swimmer so she spent every minute she could in the PG&E pool. She had a tumor in her brain stem detected last November, an operation on Thanksgiving, shrunk it with radiation after that. Her parents are Ted & Rita. Ted's got Crohn's disease, Rita has chronic headaches, and nausea, and underwent a hysterectomy last fall. Ted grew up in Hinkley. His brother Robbie, and his wife May and their five children: Robbie Jr, Martha, Ed, Rose & Peter *also* lived on the plume. Their number is 454-9554. You want their diseases?
NOT PERSONAL! That is my WORK, my SWEAT, and MY TIME AWAY FROM MY KIDS! IF THAT IS NOT PERSONAL, I DON'T KNOW WHAT IS!
God save me, and watch over you all.
Bad neighborhood, Snake! You don't want to be walking from the Bowery to 42nd Street at night. I've been driving a cab here for 30 years and I'm telling you: you don't walk around here at night! Yes, sir! Those Crazies'll kill you and strip you in ten seconds flat! Usually I'm not down around here myself, but I wanted to catch that show. That stuff is like gold around here, you know.
Good evening. Although I shall not be present at this historic summit meeting, I present this in the hope that our great nations may learn to live in peace...
They're savages, Mr. President.
You wanna see him sprayed all over that map, baby? Now where's the President?
Ayy! Number Onnee! You're the Duke! You're the Duke!  You're the... Duke.  You're... A-number one.
It's the survival of the human race, Plissken. Something you don't give a **** about.
Attention. You are now entering the Debarkation Area. No talking. No smoking. Follow the orange line to the Processing Area. The next scheduled departure to the prison is in two hours. You now have the option to terminate and be cremated on the premises. If you elect this option, notify the Duty Sergeant in your Processing Area.
Because I loathe bananas!
I would like you to call me. Would you do that? I'd like it.
Sorry, I'm just... trying to be nice.
You don't tell me things, Joel. I'm an open book. I tell you everything, every ****, embarrassing thing.
My embarrassing admission is I really like that you're nice, right now.
We'll dispose of these mementos when we're done here, that way you won't be confused by their unexplainable presence in your home.
I could die right now, Clem. I'm just... happy. I've never felt that before. I'm just exactly where I want to be.
That was beautiful to watch, Howard. Like a surgeon or a concert pianist.
Look at it out here, it's all falling apart. I'm erasing you and I'm happy!
Drink up, young man. It'll make the whole seduction part less repugnant.
I don't need nice. I don't need myself to be it, and I don't need anybody else to be it at me.
Blessed are the forgetful, for they get the better even of their blunders.  Nietzsche. Beyond Good and Evil. Found it in my Bartlett's.
I really want her to pick me up. It's amazing how strong that desire is.
You looked happy. Happy with a secret.
Look at him, perverse as a pink pickle.
All of us are freaks in one way or another. Try being born a male Russian Countess into a white, middle class, Baptist family in Mississippi, and you'll see what I mean.
Everything's green on my screen, skipper.
You can't leave. She won't let you.
I'm gonna break your face!
An animal? An animal? That's the stupidest thing I've ever heard.
I'm all right now, Ashley! Come unlock this chain and let me out! I'm all right now! It's your sister Cheryl!
Now the sun will be up in an hour or so, and we can all get out of here together. You, me, Linda, Shelly. Hmm... Well... not Shelly, she? We'll all be going home together. Wouldn't you like to be going home? I bet you'd like that, wouldn't you, Scott?
I don't know what I would have done if I had remained on those hot coals, burning my pretty flesh.
It's useless! Useless! In time it will come for him and then it will come for you!
You're not gonna leave me here, are you? Are ya, Ash?
Soon all of you will be like me... And then who will lock you up in a cellar?
We can't bury Shelly - S-She's a friend of ours.
The future has taken root in the present.
Good and evil, there never is one without the other.
Merlin! Where are you? Call your dragon to weave a mist to hide us!
You're not listening... well, your heart is not. Love is deaf as well as blind. That's it.
Ready my knights for battle. They will ride with their king once more. I have lived through others for far too long. Lancelot carried my honor, and Guenevere, my guilt. Mordred bears my sins. My knights have fought my causes. Now, my brother, I shall be... king.
Death to the demoness Allegra Geller!
I suppose a smaller-caliber pistol would have to fire baby teeth.
eXistenZ. Written like this. One word. Small 'E', capital 'X', capital 'Z'. 'eXistenZ'. It's new, it's from Antenna Research, and it's here... right now.
You'll be seeing a lot of changes around here. Papa's got a brand new bag.
Sir why are you so upset? It's just Pollux Troy.
In 1991, the United States invaded Iraq, and afterwards weapons inspectors discovered Saddam was six months off enriching uranium to sufficiently high specification to make a nuclear bomb. He had fissile material, and not a single person in the CIA had the slightest clue that such a program even existed. So, now, one decade on are you telling me that you're 100% sure these tubes are not intended to create nuclear weapons?
Uh, sir, Larry King just canceled. Apparently there's a bigger story.
Why the long face? Let's talk in my office.
Good thing you're flexible enough to watch your own back... 'cause I ain't doing it no more.
I found a broken gasket from space.
You guys look like an '80s rock band!
This is Ben Grimm here - the first mook from Brooklyn to go into outer space. So pay him some respect.
Digital camera - $250. Memory stick - $59. The look on your hard-*** former C.O.'s face when he finds out he's your junior pilot - priceless.
Yeah - I have that effect on people.
I swear to you... I will do everything in my power until there is not a breath left in me- You're gonna be Ben again.
Hey. Nice do. Likin' the grandpa look.
Painful? You don't know the meaning of the word.
That's my nose, genius. These are my lips.
Let's see if we can get blood from a stone.
How bad is it? You know, I used to smoke.
Look around.  I'll get us drinks.  They always let blind girls cut the line.
Had a little relapse, huh? Welcome back!
Tell me, when you grew up in Brooklyn, how many astronauts did you know?  You went your own way then. You didn't listen to people. So why start now?
Get me on the a.m. shows, Larry King, cover of the Journal. Gonna have to do something about this scar. Make sure they only shoot me from my left side.
That was pure wild animal craziness.
One of those slovenly farmers is probably wearing my tail for a necktie.
I love you, but I should have never married you.
If what I think is happening, IS happening... It better not be.
Y'all are trespassin' now. *Illegally*.
Honey, I am seven fox years old. My father died at seven and a half. I don't want to live in a hole anymore, and I'm going to do something about it.
The medieval philosophers were right. Man is the center of the universe. We stand in the middle of infinity between outer and inner space, and there's no limit to either.
You'll wind up a Hindu; and love all forms of life, no matter how small.
How much can a man give to his country?
Just keep it still back there, lady, or we're going to have to, you know, shoot you.
I'm not sure I agree with you a hundred percent on your police work, there, Lou.
Mind if I sit down? I'm carrying quite a load here.
I decided not to park there.
Oh for Pete's sake, he's fleeing the interview! He's fleeing the interview!
But you're sayin'... what are ya sayin'?
Ah, hon, ya got Arby's all over me.
OK, so we got a trooper pulls someone over, we got a shooting, these folks drive by, there's a high-speed pursuit, ends here and then this execution-type deal.
I'm not talking about your **** word, Jerry.
How was everything today?
I think I just came... didn't you feel it?
You are a wuss: part wimp, and part *****.
Hey, wait a minute, there's no birthday party for me here!
Awesome! Totally awesome! All right, Hamilton!
What do you mean, better in bed? Either you do it or you don't.
Hope you had a **** of a ****, Arnold!
I can see it all now, this is gonna be just like last summer. You fell in love with that girl at the Fotomat, you bought forty dollars worth of ******' film, and you never even talked to her. You don't even own a camera.
Aloha. My name is Mr. Hand.
Brad, your sister's turning into a fox!
This is U.S. History, I see the globe right there.
That kid's been stoned since the third grade
Jeez. Doesn't anyone ******* knock any more?
You stay away from my wife, my life, my home, and my skunk!
What are you gonna do? Blow me away?
You really are incredibly stupid, aren't you? I like that in a man.
It's okay. He's just admiring the shape of your skull.
All energy flows according to the whims of the Great Magnet. What a fool I was to defy him.
Did they pay you to ***** that bear?
There's one thing you should probably understand... *Can you hear me?* Good. I want you to have all the background. This is a very ominous assignment, with overtones of extreme personal danger. I'm a Doctor of Journalism! This is important, goddammit! This is a ******* true story!
That'll blast you right through the wall. You'll be stone dead in ten seconds. ****, they'll make me explain things!
There he goes. One of God's own prototypes. A high-powered mutant of some kind never even considered for mass production. Too weird to live, and too rare to die.
That ******* isn't gonna get away with this. I mean, what is going on in this country when a scumsucker like that can get away with sandbagging a doctor of journalism? Can you tell me that?
I'm not really sure I can answer that, but what I can say is that if Margaret Mead, at her age, smoked grass... she'd have one **** of a trip!
If I were you, I'd leave the Doctor alone until after he's eaten his breakfast because he's a very crude man.  Jesus God!
I was right in the middle of a ******* reptile zoo, and somebody was giving booze to these goddamn things. Won't be long now before they tear us to shreds.
Dogs ****** the Pope... no fault of mine.
Now this was a superior machine. Ten grand worth of gimmicks and high-priced special effects. The rear windows lit up with a touch like frogs in a dynamite pond. The dashboard was full of esoteric lights and dials and meters that I would never understand.
A drug person can learn to cope with things like seeing their dead grandmother crawling up their leg with a knife in her teeth. But no one should be asked to handle this trip.
Yeah, I know. I'm guilty. I understand that. I knew it was a crime, and I did it anyways. ****, why argue? I'm a ******* criminal, look at me.
If the pigs were gathering in Vegas, I felt the drug culture should be represented as well. And there was a certain bent appeal in the notion of running a savage burn on one Las Vegas hotel, and then just wheeling across town and checking into another. Me and a thousand ranking cops from all over America. Why not? Move confidently into their midst.
One toke? You poor fool! Wait till you see those goddamn bats.
I hate to say this, but this place is getting to me. I think I'm getting the Fear.
Don't take any guff from these ******* swine.
I'm a relatively respectable citizen. Multiple felon perhaps, but certainly not dangerous.
You people just don't understand! This car is property of the World Bank, that money goes to Italy!
There was only one road back to L.A. - U.S. Interstate 15. Just a flat-out high speed burn through Baker and Barstow and Berdoo. Then onto the Hollywood Freeway, and straight on into frantic oblivion. Safety. Obscurity. Just another freak, in the freak kingdom.
****, he's killing himself!
...hamburger stand, she's a waitress about 16 years old. They chopped her goddamn head off right there in the parking lot. Then they cut all kinds of holes in her and sucked out the blood. They were after the peneal gland I think. Yeah. Nah, how's ya mama?
The possibility of physical and mental collapse is now very real. No sympathy for the Devil, keep that in mind. Buy the ticket, take the ride.
Wear some golf shoes, otherwise we'll never get out of this place alive. Impossible to walk in this muck. No footing at all.
I've never missed a plane yet.
Step right up and shoot the pasties off the nipples of a ten foot bull ****! Win a cotton candy goat!
With a bit of luck, his life was ruined forever. Always thinking that just behind some narrow door in all of his favorite bars, men in red woolen shirts are getting incredible kicks from things he'll never know.
What kind of rat ******* psychotic would play that song right now, at this moment?
Is this not a reasonable place to park?
Finish the ******* story man! What happened? What about the glands?
Bazooko's Circus is what the whole hep world would be doing Saturday nights if the Nazis had won the war. This was the Sixth Reich.
Jesus, bad waves of paranoia, madness, fear and loathing - intolerable vibrations in this place. Get out. The weasels were closing in. I could smell the ugly brutes.
You drive. You drive. I think there's something wrong with me.
Total control now. Tooling along the main drag on a Saturday night in Vegas. Two good old boys in a fire-apple red convertible. Stoned. Ripped. Twisted. Good people.
One of the things you learn from years of dealing with drug people, is that you can turn your back on a person, but never turn your back on a drug. Especially when it's waving a razor-sharp hunting knife in your eye.
My attorney had never been able to accept the notion, often espoused by former drug abusers, that you can get a lot higher without drugs than with them, and neither have I for that matter.
You people voted for Hubert Humphrey, and you killed Jesus.
We cant stop here this is bat country.
Those of us that had been up all night were in no mood for coffee and donuts, we wanted strong drink. We were, after all, the absolute cream of the national sporting press.
Our vibrations were getting *****. But why? Was there no communication in this car? Had we deteriorated to the level of dumb beasts?
Strange memories on this nervous night in Las Vegas. Has it been five years? Six? It seems like a lifetime, the kind of peak that never comes again. San Francisco in the middle sixties was a very special time and place to be a part of. But no explanation, no mix of words or music or memories can touch that sense of knowing that you were there and alive in that corner of time in the world. Whatever it meant.
Ferris Bueller, you're my hero.
Cameron has never been in love - at least, nobody's ever been in love with him. If things don't change for him, he's gonna marry the first girl he lays, and she's gonna treat him like ****, because she will have given him what he has built up in his mind as the end-all, be-all of human existence. She won't respect him, 'cause you can't respect somebody who kisses your ***. It just doesn't work.
Pardon my French, but you're an *******! *******!
You have reached the Coughlin Brothers Mortuary. We're deeply sorry we are not able to come to the phone right now, but if you leave your name and number, we will get back to you as soon as humanly possible.
Hey, Cameron. You realize if we played by the rules right now we'd be in gym?
Gummi bear? It's been in my pocket; they're real warm and soft.
Oh, he's very popular Ed. The sportos, the motorheads, geeks, *****, bloods, wastoids, dweebies, dickheads - they all adore him. They think he's a righteous dude.
Excuse me: if whoever was in this house is still in the house, I'd like you to know that I've just called the police. I'd also like to add that I've got my father's gun and a *scorching* case of herpes.
Not that I condone fascism, or any -ism for that matter. -Ism's in my opinion are not good. A person should not believe in an -ism, he should believe in himself. I quote John Lennon, "I don't believe in Beatles, I just believe in me." Good point there. After all, he was the walrus. I could be the walrus. I'd still have to bum rides off people.
If anyone needs a day off, it's Cameron. He has a lot of things to sort out before he graduates. Can't be wound up this tight and go to college, his roommate will kill him.
Peterson home on line one. And watch your mouth this time.
It must've been Tuesday. He was wearing his cornflower-blue tie.
With insomnia, nothing's real. Everything's far away. Everything's a copy of a copy of a copy.
You wanna see pain? Swing by First Methodist Tuesday nights. See the guys with testicular cancer. That's pain.
You're not getting this back. I consider it ******* tax.
We're a generation of men raised by women. I'm wondering if another woman is really the answer we need.
I've got a stomachful of Xanax. I took what was left of a bottle. It might have been too much.
Tell him. Tell him, The liberator who destroyed my property has realigned my perceptions.
You can swallow a pint of blood before you get sick.
His name is Robert Paulson.
It's just, when you buy furniture, you tell yourself, that's it. That's the last sofa I'm gonna need. Whatever else happens, I've got that sofa problem handled.
In the world I see - you are stalking elk through the damp canyon forests around the ruins of Rockefeller Center. You'll wear leather clothes that will last you the rest of your life. You'll climb the wrist-thick kudzu vines that wrap the Sears Tower. And when you look down, you'll see tiny figures pounding corn, laying strips of venison on the empty car pool lane of some abandoned superhighway.
Deja vu - all over again.
Go ahead, Cornelius, you can cry.
Every evening I died, and every evening I was born again, resurrected.
I had it all. Even the glass dishes with tiny bubbles and imperfections, proof they were crafted by the honest, simple, hard-working indigenous peoples of... wherever.
When you have insomnia, you're never really asleep... and you're never really awake.
This is a chemical burn. It will hurt more than you've ever been burned before. You will have a scar.
And then, something happened. I let go. Lost in oblivion. Dark and silent and complete. I found freedom. Losing all hope was freedom.
On a long enough timeline, the survival rate for everyone drops to zero.
Welcome to Fight Club. The first rule of Fight Club is: you do not talk about Fight Club. The second rule of Fight Club is: you DO NOT talk about Fight Club! Third rule of Fight Club: someone yells "stop!", goes limp, taps out, the fight is over. Fourth rule: only two guys to a fight. Fifth rule: one fight at a time, fellas. Sixth rule: No shirts, no shoes. Seventh rule: fights will go on as long as they have to. And the eighth and final rule: if this is your first time at Fight Club, you have to fight.
This isn't a real suicide-thing. This is probably one of those cry-for-help things.
Life insurance pays off triple if you die on a business trip.
You had to give it to him: he had a plan. And it started to make sense, in a Tyler sort of way. No fear. No distractions. The ability to let that which does not matter truly slide.
Reject the basic assumptions of civilization, especially the importance of material possessions.
You said that if anyone ever interferes with Project Mayhem, even you, we gotta get his balls.
It's called a changeover. The movie goes on, and nobody in the audience has any idea.
In death, a member of project mayhem has a name, his name is robert paulsen.
Candy-stripe a cancer ward. It's not my problem.
Strangers with this kind of honesty make me go a big rubbery one.
Tyler sold his soap to department stores at $20 a bar. Lord knows what they charged. It was beautiful. We were selling rich women their own fat asses back to them.
We have front row seats for this theatre of mass destruction. The demolitions committee of Project Mayhem wrapped the foundation columns of a dozen buildings with blasting gelatin. In two minutes primary charges will blow base charges and a few square blocks will be reduced to smoldering rubble. I know this, because Tyler knows this.
You have a kind of sick desperation in your laugh.
You don't know where I've been. You don't know where I've been. Just let us have the basement, Lou!
Like so many others, I had become a slave to the Ikea nesting instinct.
I am Jack's complete lack of surprise.
I've been going to Debtor's Anonymous. You want to see some really ******-up people...
If I didn't say anything, people always assumed the worst.
Except for their humping, Tyler and Marla were never in the same room. My parents pulled this exact same act for years.
When deep space exploration ramps up, it'll be the corporations that name everything, the IBM Stellar Sphere, the Microsoft Galaxy, Planet Starbucks.
I want you to hit me as hard as you can.
You met me at a very strange time in my life.
I am Jack's raging bile duct.
**** you! **** Fight Club! **** Marla! I am sick of all your ****!
I am Jack's cold sweat.
If you wake up at a different time in a different place, could you wake up as a different person?
Something on your mind, dear?
Without pain, without sacrifice, we would have nothing. Like the first monkey shot into space.
It's cheaper than a movie, and there's free coffee.
I flipped through catalogs and wondered: What kind of dining set defines me as a person?
After fighting, everything else in your life got the volume turned down.
When the fight was over, nothing was solved, but nothing mattered. We all felt saved.
I got in everyone's hostile little face. Yes, these are bruises from fighting. Yes, I'm comfortable with that. I am enlightened.
He was full of pep. Must've had his grande-latte *****.
I am Jack's smirking revenge.
Fight Club was the beginning, now it's moved out of the basement, it's called Project Mayhem.
The things you own end up owning you.
God ****! We just had a near-life experience, fellas.
A guy who came to Fight Club for the first time, his *** was a wad of cookie dough. After a few weeks, he was carved out of wood.
We have just lost cabin pressure.
Now, a question of etiquette - as I pass, do I give you the *** or the crotch?
I wasn't really dying. I wasn't host to cancer or parasites. I was the warm little center that the life of this world crowded around.
You're the worst thing that's ever happened to me.
Don't worry. It's all taken care of, sir.
You tried to capitalize but I caught you, you ****! Yeah, I can beat you. Not forever, but I've got this cabin rigged to beat you now!
In death there are no accidents, no coincidences, no mishaps, and no escapes.
There they go, here we stay.
You got this? No one gets back on board. That's my call!
I won't let it happen, okay?
And I ******* hated French class!
I got this feeling... a weird feeling.
You already did that by walking off the plane. Now you gotta out when and how it'll come back at you. Play your hunch, Alex. If you think you can get away from it. But beware the risk of cheating the plan, disrespecting the design... could initiate a horrifying fury that would terrorize even the Grim Reaper - and you don't even want to **** with that MacDaddy.
Because of you, I'm still alive.  Thank you.
You have a responsibility to tell me!
I knew I shoulda hit on Tammy in the pool that time.
It depends on which one of us is next.
Please tell me I'm gonna get to see the Jets win the Super Bowl!
I know what I have to do to save us. I have to die.
If it is my time to go and be in heaven with my family, I can accept that.
Hello, Clear. I've been expecting you.
Yeah, like, what if we're all getting that "Diff'rent Strokes" curse or something?
There's gonna be a huge accident. Everybody's gonna die!
We're *all* going to die.
Dead, yet still fresh.
Which means death could be coming for us?
Ever hear of the ozone layer, *******?
To the top of Mount Wanna-hock-a-loogie.
I'm having fish tonight.
Fish aren't meant to be in a box, kid. It does things to them.
...and the sea cucumber turns to the mollusk and says, "With fronds like these, who needs anemones?"
Kid, if there's anything you need, just ask your auntie Deb. That's me. Or if I'm not around, you can talk to my sister, Flo.  Hi, how are ya? Don't listen to anything my sister says, she's nuts!
Something's wrong with you, really.
Oh, the human mouth is a disgusting place.
Dolphins, yeah! They think they're so cute. "Oh, look at me, I'm a flippy little dolphin, let me flip for you. Ain't I something?"
The dropoff? They're going to the dropoff? What - what are you insane? Why not just fry them up now and serve them with chips?
Hi there. From my neck of the woods, eh? Sorry if I took a snap at you at one time. Fish gotta swim, birds gotta eat.
I'm dead. I'm dead, I'm dead, I'm dead, I'm dead, I died, I'm dead.
Hey. You guys made me ink.
Hey, look. "Esc-a-pay". I wonder what that means? That's funny, it's spelled just like the word "escape."
Oh. Intro- Jellyman, offspring. Offspring, Jellyman.
I am a nice shark, not a mindless eating machine. If I am to change this image, I must first change myself. Fish are friends, not food.
You think you can do these things, but you just can't, Nemo.
All drains lead to the ocean.
If this is some kind of practical joke, it's not funny, and I know funny. I'm a clownfish.
Oh, it's awesome, Jellyman. The little dudes are just eggs, we leave 'em on a beach to hatch, and then, coo-coo-cachoo, they find their way back to the big ol' blue.
Uh, Dad, you can let go now.
Of course he wants us to move over there. That's EATING US.
I didn't come this far to be breakfast.
I have to get out of here! I have to find my son! I have to tell him how old sea turtles are!
He really doesn't mean it, you know! He never even knew his father!
That's the shortest red light I've ever seen!
See this tentacle? It's actually shorter than all my other tentacles, but you can't really tell, especially when I twirl them like this.
Thank god, the... police.
Can I borrow your towel? My car just hit a water buffalo.
Look, defenseless babies!
You guys get that pig unfucked and get it on the tree line!
Coons? Well raccoons tried to get in our back porch, Momma just chase 'em off with a broom!
I'm sorry I had to fight in the middle of your Black Panther party.
She got the cancer and died on a Tuesday. I bought her a new hat with little flowers on it. And that's all I have to say about that.
When I was in China on the All-American Ping Pong team, I just loved playing ping-pong with my Flexolite ping pong paddle.
Sometimes, I guess there just aren't enough rocks.
He should not be hitting you, Jenny.
You know it's funny what a young man recollects? 'Cause I don't remember bein' born. I don't recall what I got for my first Christmas and I don't know when I went on my first outdoor picnic. But I do remember the first time I heard the sweetest voice in the wide world.
You can sit here if ya want.
And cause I was a gazillionaire, and I liked doin it so much, I cut that grass for free.
Hello. My name's Forrest, Forrest Gump. You want a chocolate?
Listen, you promise me something, OK? Just if you're ever in trouble, don't be brave. You just run, OK? Just run away.
Mama always said, dying was a part of life. I sure wish it wasn't.
Lieutenant Dan, I got you some ice cream.  Lieutenant Dan, ice cream.
I never thanked you for saving my life.
Yeah, sir, you might want to send a maintenance man over to that office across the way. The lights are off, and they must be looking for a fuse box, 'cause them flashlights, they keep me awake.
I'm sorry I ruined your New Year's Eve party, Lieutenant Dan. She tasted like cigarettes.
That boy sure is a runnin' fool!
Mama says they was magic shoes. They could take me anywhere.
Mama always had a way of explaining things so I could understand them.
That's all I have to say about that.
Her dream had come true. She was a folk singer.
That kid may be the stupidest son of a ***** I've ever seen, but he sure is fast!
Gump, how can you watch that stupid ****? Turn it off.
We did it right there in the big cauldron.
Problem? I haven't got a problem. I've got ******* problems. Plural.
Well, most recently, there's room 309, there's this scary Mexican gangster dude poking his finger in my chest. There's his hooligan kids snapping their fingers at me. There's a putrid, rotting corpse of a dead ***** stuck in the springs of the bed. There's rooms blazing afire. There's a big fat needle from God knows where, stuck in my leg, infecting me with God knows what. And finally there's me, walking out the door, right ******* now. Buenas noches.
How can I stop talking about something that's so HUGE?
Unfortunately, you don't have the balls to back up the actions of your huge ****.
Goddess Diana, fail you I will. / I was to bring you fresh sperm from my Bill. / I had him erect and his ***** would follow. / Alas, I was hot. So hot that I swallowed.
There's no needles here kid, just a big ******* gun!
I'm gonna tell ya what the **** I'm talking about! I drive a motherfucking Honda that my sister sold me, ya hear what I'm saying? A little white motherfucking Honda Civic!
I'm coming up and if there isn't a dead body by the time I get there, I'll make one myself. You!
Your dad says he doesn't trust babysitters. Well, can't say I blame him. I had a babysitter myself once...
Everybody starts out as strangers, Ted. It's where we end up that counts.
Even a broken clock is right twice a day.
You know what nobody understands about certain kinds of low pay public service work, every now and then you get put a ******* stake in a bad guys heart. I'm not supposed to talk about that when I visit third grade classes for career day and it doesn't get you very far in the country club locker room, but its hard to beat when you actually get to do it.
Is it safe to say that the person who inflicted this wound intended to kill?
I appreciate your concern for the dignity of the court 007, Unfortunately, the man is a tax-paying citizen and entitled by our constitution to try and manipulate the legal system like everybody else.
I do know that for the sympathy of one living being, I would make peace with all. I have love in me the likes of which you can scarcely imagine and rage the likes of which you would not believe. If I cannot satisfy the one, I will indulge the other.
Don't bother to scream.
I'd keep my promises if I were you.
I'm still here, Chief.
Shoulda, woulda, coulda, pal.
Ya'know the past is a funny thing, we all got skeletons in closet and ya never when one is gonna pop up and bite ya in the a...
What hath God wrought?
Well, hi. What are you doing out in this mess?
Is that all you're gonna do this weekend? Smoke dope?
Would you be yourself, if you looked like this?
Hey, the van's on fire!
Night time is the right time.
Just use the combos, and keep the feet light...
You're dead meat, slimeball!  Hey, it's cool, man! It's cool!
Walking corpses are not real.
Facing your fear doesn't always conquer it.
Go ahead... take your best shot, ************!
OK, ramblers. Let's get rambling.
I swear to God in Jesus Christ's name.
Every person who... chooses the service of God as his life's work has something in common. I don't care if you're a preacher, a priest, a nun, a rabbi or a Buddhist monk. Many, many times during your life you will look at your reflection in a mirror and ask yourself: am I a fool? I'm not going through a lapse; what I've experienced is closer to awakening.
Attention ***** shoppers! Take advantage of our penny ***** sale! If you buy one piece of ***** at the regular price, you get another piece of ***** of equal or lesser value for only a penny! Try and beat ***** for a penny! If you can find cheaper ***** anywhere else, **** it!
Well, your best better get a **** of a lot ******* better, or you are gonna feel a **** of a lot ******* worse.
Here is the peace in death I could not give you in life.
All right, *****, *****, *****! Come on in ***** lovers! Here at the Titty Twister we're slashing ***** in half! Give us an offer on our vast selection of *****, this is a ***** blow out! All right, we got white *****, black *****, Spanish *****, yellow *****, we got hot *****, cold *****, we got wet *****, we got  smelly *****, we got hairy *****, bloody *****, we got snappin' *****, we got silk *****, velvet *****, Naugahyde *****, we even got horse *****, dog *****, chicken *****! Come on, you want *****, come on in, ***** lovers! If we don't got it, you don't want it! Come on in, ***** lovers!
You touch my brother with that stake, biker, and vampires won't have to suck your blood. They'll be able to lick it up off the floor.
Yo monkeyman!  Anything you got to say to them, say to me first.
Okay hard drinkers, let's drink hard. I'm buyin'.
I may be a *******, but I'm not a ******* *******.
Fight now, cry later.
"Low profile." Do you know what the words "low profile" mean?
All right, vampire killers... let's kill some ******* vampires.
You know what they say about me? I suck!
You're gonna be okay, baby. You're gonna be okay.
You're my best friend, and I don't even like you.
Whoever wrote this episode should DIE.
Oh, of course! IT'S ALL ABOUT YOU, ISN'T IT?
I avoided capture by using your Mak'tar stealth haze.
How adorable. The actors are going to play war with me.
You broke the ship. You broke the bloody ship.
It's the simple things in life you treasure.
You know, with all that makeup and stuff, I actually thought you were SMART for a second.
This is great. Usually it's just cardboard walls in a garage.
It's like throwing gasoline on a flame.
By Grabthar's hammer, by the sons of Worvan, you shall be avenged.
I remember that sound. That's a bad sound.
Never give up. Never surrender.
That was a **** of a thing.
Sorry, I was - door was a little sticky. Did you see that? I'll get one of my boys up here with a can of WD-40.
I see you've managed to get your shirt off.
Let's get out of here before one of those things kills Guy.
Could you possibly try NOT to hit EVERY SINGLE ONE?
Where's the happy ending, Jason? "Never give up, never surrender"?
I'm not even supposed to be here. I'm just "Crewman Number Six." I'm expendable. I'm the guy in the episode who dies to prove how serious the situation is. I've gotta get outta here.
As long as there is injustice, whenever a Targathian baby cries out, wherever a distress signal sounds among the stars, we'll be there. This fine ship, this fine crew. Never give up... and never surrender.
Hey guys, I just wanted you to know that, the reactors won't take it; the ship is breaking apart and all that... Just FYI.
Wow, the floors are so clean.
By Grapthar's hammer... what a savings.
I mean, this is unreal. They're gonna start eating each other out there.
There is no "quantum flux". There's no "auxiliary". THERE'S NO ********* SHIP. You got it?
Need I remind you that this man is wearing a costume, not a uniform. He's no more qualified to lead us than ... this fellow... No offense...
The Red Soxs are always winning, until they lose.
You know what Mother said to me? That Daddy's demons are so intense, he doesn't even know when he's lying.
Steven not only wears disguises. He goes to the theater armed.
I just can't take it any more. He forgets simple lines, he forgets where to stand, and we tell him and we tell him and we tell him. I know he's a sweet man; I love Peter; I know it's not his fault. But I have never worked on a show where the leading man has a parasite in his brain.
I coulda been happy. I coulda been a Yankees fan.
You know your head ain't on straight?
What's the matter with you, Kable? Kill something!
He will be saying prayers in the garden. Just follow the others.
Whenever I despair, I remember that the way of truth and love has always won. There may be tyrants and murderers, and for a time, they may seem invincible, but in the end, they always fail. Think of it: always.
There are no goodbyes for us. Wherever you are, you will always be in my heart.
Whatever moral ascendancy the West once held was lost here today. India is free, for she has taken all that steel and cruelty can give and she has neither cringed nor retreated.
An eye for an eye only ends up making the whole world blind.
You're the only man I know who makes his own clothes.
We think it is time that you recognized that you are masters in someone else's home. Despite the best intentions of the best of you, you must, in the nature of things, humiliate us to control us. General Dyer is but an extreme example of the principle... it is time you left.
Mr. Gandhi will find that it takes a great deal more than a pinch of salt to bring down the British Empire.
If you are a minority of one, the truth is the truth.
No son, never. The blood stays on the blade. One day you'll understand.
Ears and noses will be the trophies of the day. But no hand shall touch him.
The appearance of law must be upheld, especially when it's being broken.
I come for my due and proper.
Prepare to meet the true lord.
"Unacceptable risk of heart failure." I think that's what the manual says. The only trip I'll take in space is around the sun on this satellite right here.
They used to say that a child conceived in love has a greater chance of happiness. They don't say that anymore.
Is the only way you can succeed is to see me fail?
I'm sorry, the wind caught it...
You want to know how I did it? This is how I did it, Anton: I never saved anything for the swim back.
I got the better end of the deal. I only lent you my body - you lent me your dream.
Jack, don't you think you ought to get dressed first.
I've come for you, Margaret.
Do you want to be dead Albert?
Frank wasn't like that. I'm the villain in the family, remember?
Who do you think you're ******' with?
You're a big man, but you're out of shape. For me it's a full time job.
Take your clothes off.
You couldn't run an egg and spoon race Eric.
They keep talking about forgiveness. "Ask Jesus for forgiveness." I never did nothing to him.
If you don't listen, you can't hear nothing.
I've talked to God a lot about you over the years. He said He broke the mold when He made you. Says you're sure entertaining to watch, but way too much trouble.
For every one like me, there's one like you, son. I about forgot that.
Don't you puke on my shoes Harry.
Rough business, this movie business. I'm gonna have to go back to loan-sharking just to take a rest.
You think we watch any of your movies, Harry? I've seen better film on teeth.
I want us to be friends, Faye. And we all know that friends don't hit each other... unless they have to.
I'm really glad you rejected me ten years ago when I auditioned for the part of Eddie Solomon, the pedophile clown in "Birthday Boy". If I'd have gotten that part, I might have been typecast.
Well, aren't you gonna offer me whatever it is you taste like?
Harry's dreaming of a forty million dollar production he'll never get off the ground, with a star he'll never sign with or without my help.
They say the ******* smog is the ******* reason you have such beautiful ******* sunsets.
Chili's a gangster, ran a club I used to play at for another gangster back in Miami.
The guy's been in town two days, and already he thinks he's David O. ******* Selznick.
I got an idea for a movie.
Where's Chili Palmer, where's Leo DeVoe... *where's* my ******' money?
I'm the guy who's telling you the way it is.
Hi, Karen, it's Doris. Listen doll, you might want to come by and visit Harry. He's in the Emergency Room.
I once asked this literary agent, uh, what kind of writing paid the best... he said, "Ransom notes."
What is the point of living in L.A. if you're not in the movie business?
Now, be looking. The man over to your right in the blue wool shirt?  The other way. Derecho! That's a federal officer, most likely DEA. He moves his leg, you look for the bulge. You savvy bulge?  Good, that's his backup piece.  Hey! Try and do it without looking at him, if you can.
Look, I didn't come down to sunny Florida to freeze my ***. You follow me? You get the coat back or you give me the three seventy-nine dollars my ex-wife paid for it at Alexander's.
Have you spoken to Mr. Palmer since your husband blew up?
Somebody call 9-fucking-1-1-1! Somebody call 9-fucking-1-1-1! Somebody call 9-fucking-1-1-1!
Well do you see a black leather jacket, fingertip length like the one Pacino wore in "Serpico"? 'Cause if you don't you owe me three hundred and seventy nine dollars.
A blockbuster but quality. No mutants or maniacs. This is gonna be my "Driving Miss Daisy".
Chili Palmer. It's chilly outside and it's Chili inside. It's a regular ******' chili-fest!
Why don't you go haunt a house? Rattle some chains or something.
Ahh what I wouldn't give for a drag! Just one drag!
I'm sorry, but, could I get another one? I... uh... signed the wrong name.
Shot, huh? That'll do it every time.
You don't know me, but I love him.
Oh, we totally have to.
Gimme all your money, *****!
Hey, look. There's the pants.
Well, I have to admit that things are really starting to look up for me since my life turned to ****.
That piece is entitled "Mirror, Father, Mirror". I like to show it to people that I'm meeting for the first time because I think it says so much about who I am and what it feels like to inhabit my specific skin.
God, I'm so sick of Seymour.
What are we, in slow motion here? C'mon, what are you, hypnotized? Have some more kids, why don't you.
Well, as long as she's not a complete imbecile and she's even remotely attractive.
Wow, that is one ugly dude.
Sir? The Titanic has just arrived.
Being miserable and treating other people like dirt is every New Yorker's God-given right.
On a mountain of skulls, in the castle of pain, I sat on a throne of blood! What was will be! What is will be no more! Now is the season of evil!
Viggy, Viggy, Viggy, you have been a bad monkey!
Of course not, and that is the whole problem with aliens is you just can't trust them. Occasionally you meet a nice once: Star Man, E.T... But usually they turn out to be some kind of big lizard! But that's all the time we've got for this week on World of the Psychic. Next week though...  Give me Ira. Hairless pets. Weird.  But until then, this is Peter Venkman saying-
Let's see what happens when we take away the puppy.
You know, I just can't believe things have gotten so bad in this city that there's no way back. I mean, sure, it's messy, it's crowded, it's polluted, and there are people who would just as soon step on your face as look at you. But come on! There's gotta be a few sparks of sweet humanity left in this burned-out bird. We just gotta find a way to mobilize it!
Don't ever touch my sister again.
He killed the man who set you free.
So Spaniard, we shall go to Rome together and have bloody adventures. And the great ***** will suckle us until we are fat and happy and can suckle no more. And then, when enough men have died, perhaps you will have your freedom.
Today I saw a slave become more powerful than the Emperor of Rome.
We who are about to die, salute you!
If only you had been born a man, what a Caesar you would have made.
Those giraffes you sold me, they won't mate. They just walk around, eating, and not mating. You sold me... ***** giraffes. I want my money back.
Ancestors, I ask you for your guidance. Blessed mother, come to me with the Gods' desire for my future. Blessed father, watch over my wife and son with a ready sword. Whisper to them that I live only to hold them again, for all else is dust and air. Ancestors, I honor you and will try to live with the dignity that you have taught me.
There was a dream that was Rome. You could only whisper it. Anything more than a whisper and it would vanish, it was so fragile.
How can you talk to me that way? I work here! I didn't come here to be mistreated!
You can't think on your feet, you oughta keep your mouth closed.
All train compartments smell vaguely of ****. It gets so you don't mind it. That's the worst thing that I can confess. You know how long it took me to get there? A long time. When you die you're going to regret the things you don't do. You think you're *****? I'm going to tell you something: we're all *****. You think you're a thief? So what? You get befuddled by a middle-class morality? Get shut of it. Shut it out. You cheat on your wife? You did it, live with it. You **** little girls, so be it. There's an absolute morality? Maybe. And then what? If you think there is, go ahead, be that thing. Bad people go to ****? I don't think so. If you think that, act that way. A **** exists on earth? Yes. I won't live in it. That's me.  You ever take a dump made you feel like you'd just slept for twelve hours?
You've got a big mouth... now I'm gonna show you an even bigger one.
Cop couldn't find his ****, two hands and a map.
****. ****, ****, ****! Williamson! Williamson! Open this ******* door!
You stupid ******* ****. You, Williamson, I'm talking to you, shithead. You just cost me $6,000. Six thousand dollars, and one Cadillac. That's right. What are you going to do about it? What are you going to do about it, *******? You're ******* ****. Where did you learn your trade, you stupid ******* ****, you idiot? Who ever told you that you could work with men? Oh, I'm gonna have your job, shithead.
You know what makes it even better? If you take like a lot of pot with it. I mean like, like a lot of pot.
Let's think about this logically. She's either alive, or she's dead.
If you were any less black, you'd be clear.
*** men are so hot. It's tragic.
Just so we're clear, you stole a car, shot a bouncer, and had *** with two women?
They can't evict you on Christmas! Then you'd be ho-ho-homeless!
I'm not a bathroom attendant!
Is it safe to have a radio attached to my balls like this?
You touch my sister again, I'll kill you.
Leave the gun. Take the cannoli.
My godson has come all the way from California. Give him a drink.
Maybe we shouldn't get Mike mixed up in this too directly...
He's still alive. They hit him with five shots and he's still alive!
Just lie here, Pop. I'll take care of you now. I'm with you now. I'm with you.
Goddamn FBI don't respect nothin'.
Paulie, pull over, I gotta take a leak.
It's safer to teach you English!
I don't like violence, Tom. I'm a businessman; blood is a big expense.
I have to get back to work. It's part of the wedding. No Sicilian can ever refuse a request on his daughter's wedding day.
Michael, why are the drapes open?
If I could only live to see it, to be there with you. What I wouldn't give for twenty more years! Here we are, protected, free to make our profits without Kefauver, the goddamn Justice Department and the F.B.I. ninety miles away, in partnership with a friendly government. Ninety miles! It's nothing! Just one small step, looking for a man who wants to be President of the United States, and having the cash to make it possible. Michael, we're bigger than U.S. Steel.
Hyman Roth always makes money for his partners. One by one, our old friends are gone. Death, natural or not, prison, deported. Hyman Roth is the only one left, because he always made money for his partners.
Fredo, you're nothing to me now. You're not a brother, you're not a friend. I don't want to know you or what you do. I don't want to see you at the hotels, I don't want you near my house. When you see our mother, I want to know a day in advance, so I won't be there. You understand?
Hyman Roth has been dying from the same heart attack for the last twenty years.
There was this kid I grew up with; he was younger than me. Sorta looked up to me, you know. We did our first work together, worked our way out of the street. Things were good, we made the most of it. During Prohibition, we ran molasses into Canada... made a fortune, your father, too. As much as anyone, I loved him and trusted him. Later on he had an idea to build a city out of a desert stop-over for GI's on the way to the West Coast. That kid's name was Moe Greene, and the city he invented was Las Vegas. This was a great man, a man of vision and guts. And there isn't even a plaque, or a signpost or a statue of him in that town! Someone put a bullet through his eye. No one knows who gave the order. When I heard it, I wasn't angry; I knew Moe, I knew he was head-strong, talking loud, saying stupid things. So when he turned up dead, I let it go. And I said to myself, this is the business we've chosen; I didn't ask who gave the order, because it had nothing to do with business!
Why do you hurt me, Michael? I've always been loyal to you.
I'd give four million just to be able to take a **** without it hurting
Those were the great old days,you know... And we was like the Roman Empire... The Corleone family was like the Roman Empire...
I am a retired investor on a pension, and I wished to live there as a Jew in the twilight of my life.
I know it was you, Fredo. You broke my heart. You broke my heart!
I don't want anything to happen to him while my mother's alive.
I don't - I never knew no godfather. I got my own family, senator.
My life is a game of strip poker. Want to play?
Hatred was the only thing that kept my soul alive. And amongst the men I hated... was my dear old dumb father, who put me in that **** in the first place.
Oh, shut up. All we did was talk.
Take off your shirt, and I'll tell you all about it.
He's never met a princess - only queens.
One likes to live simply.
It is kind of you to indulge your elders in their vices. Just as I indulge the young in theirs.
You must think the whole world is *****.
Bells of **** go ting-a-ling-a-ling, for you but not for me. O death, where is thy sting-a-ling-a-ling? Grave, where thy victory?
Making movies is the most wonderful thing in the world. Working with friends - entertaining people - yes, I suppose I miss it.
What the hell's the matter with you people?  You've caused more damage than that goddamn thing did!
What? There's no Rangers game on tonight!
Better step on it, Mr. French!
That's a lot of fish.
The radiation isn't an anomaly, it's the clue.
I've always wanted to join the French Foreign Legion.
Anyone care to join me?
You're suspect! Yeah, you! I don't know what your reputation is in this town, but after the **** you tried to pull today you can bet I'll be looking into you. Now the business we have, heretofore, you can speak with my aforementioned attorney. Good day, gentlemen; and until that day comes, keep your ear to the grindstone.
So this is a Harvard bar, huh? I thought there'd be equations and **** on the wall.
I'm pumped! Let the healing begin!
You know, I was on this plane once. And I'm sittin' there and the captain comes on and he does his whole, "We'll be cruising at 35,000 feet," then he puts the mike down but he forgets to turn it off. Then he turns to the copilot and goes, "You know, all I could go for right now is a ******' blow job and a cup of coffee." So the stewardess ******' goes bombin' up from the back of the plane to tell him the mic's still on, and this guy behind me goes, "Hey hon, don't forget the coffee!"
You'll never have that kind of relationship in a world where you're afraid to take the first step because all you see is every negative thing 10 miles down the road.
Look - you're my best friend, so don't take this the wrong way. In twenty years, if you're still livin' here, comin' over to my house to watch the Patriots games, still workin' construction, I'll ******' kill you. That's not a threat; now, that's a fact. I'll ******' kill you.
I teach this ****, I didn't say I know how to do it.
My boy's wicked smart.
Hey, let's get off our motha's, afterall, I just got off yours!
Why shouldn't I work for the N.S.A.? That's a tough one, but I'll take a shot. Say I'm working at N.S.A. Somebody puts a code on my desk, something nobody else can break. Maybe I take a shot at it and maybe I break it. And I'm real happy with myself, 'cause I did my job well. But maybe that code was the location of some rebel army in North Africa or the Middle East. Once they have that location, they bomb the village where the rebels were hiding and fifteen hundred people I never met, never had no problem with, get killed. Now the politicians are sayin', "Oh, send in the Marines to secure the area" 'cause they don't give a ****. It won't be their kid over there, gettin' shot. Just like it wasn't them when their number got called, 'cause they were pullin' a tour in the National Guard. It'll be some kid from Southie takin' shrapnel in the ***. And he comes back to find that the plant he used to work at got exported to the country he just got back from. And the guy who put the shrapnel in his *** got his old job, 'cause he'll work for fifteen cents a day and no bathroom breaks. Meanwhile, he realizes the only reason he was over there in the first place was so we could install a government that would sell us oil at a good price. And, of course, the oil companies used the skirmish over there to scare up domestic oil prices. A cute little ancillary benefit for them, but it ain't helping my buddy at two-fifty a gallon. And they're takin' their sweet time bringin' the oil back, of course, and maybe even took the liberty of hiring an alcoholic skipper who likes to drink martinis and ******' play slalom with the icebergs, and it ain't too long 'til he hits one, spills the oil and kills all the sea life in the North Atlantic. So now my buddy's out of work and he can't afford to drive, so he's got to walk to the ******' job interviews, which sucks 'cause the shrapnel in his *** is givin' him chronic hemorrhoids. And meanwhile he's starvin', 'cause every time he tries to get a bite to eat, the only blue plate special they're servin' is North Atlantic scrod with Quaker State. So what did I think? I'm holdin' out for somethin' better. I figure **** it, while I'm at it why not just shoot my buddy, take his job, give it to his sworn enemy, hike up gas prices, bomb a village, club a baby seal, hit the hash pipe and join the National Guard? I could be elected president.
Do you buy all these books retail or do you send away for, like, a shrink kit that comes with all these volumes included?
Jimmy was the kind of guy that rooted for bad guys in the movies.
I got enough to worry about getting whacked on the street! I gotta come home for this! I should ******* kill you!
For a second I thought I was dead. But, when I heard all the noise, I knew they were cops. Only cops talk that way. If they'd been wiseguys, I wouldn't have heard a thing. I would've been dead.
One day some of the kids from the neighborhood carried my mother's groceries all the way home. You know why? It was outta respect.
As far back as I can remember, I always wanted to be a gangster.
Thirty-two hundred dollars he gave me. Thirty-two hundred dollars for a lifetime. It wasn't even enough to pay for the coffin.
When they found Carbone in the meat truck, he was frozen so stiff it took them three days to thaw him out for the autopsy.
After awhile, it got to be all normal. None of it seemed like crime. It was more like Henry was enterprising, and that he and the guys were making a few bucks hustling, while all the other guys were sitting on their asses, waiting for handouts. Our husbands weren't brain surgeons, they were blue-collar guys. The only way they could make extra money, real extra money, was to go out and cut a few corners.
It was revenge for Billy Batts, and a lot of other things. And there was nothing that we could do about it. Batts was a made man, and Tommy wasn't. And we had to sit still and take it. It was among the Italians. It was real greaseball ****. They even shot Tommy in the face so his mother couldn't give him an open coffin at the funeral.
Hey, you got a phone? Two ******* just stole my truck. You believe that ****, huh? You ******' believe that?
Paulie may have moved slow, but it was only because Paulie didn't have to move for anybody.
I know there are women, like my best friends, who would have gotten out of there the minute their boyfriend gave them a gun to hide. But I didn't. I got to admit the truth. It turned me on.
By the time I grew up, there was thirty billion a year in cargo moving through Idlewild Airport and believe me, we tried to steal every bit of it.
For us to live any other way was nuts. Uh, to us, those goody-good people who worked ****** jobs for bum paychecks and took the subway to work every day, and worried about their bills, were dead. I mean they were suckers. They had no balls. If we wanted something we just took it. If anyone complained twice they got hit so bad, believe me, they never complained again
This is the first time I've seen you lucid.
I want to talk to my husband. Where is he? Where is he?
My name? It's "Take your crude, overly obvious come-on to every woman who walks past and cram it." That's my name.
I think you're an overeducated 27-year-old virgin who likes to hold the hands of superstitious old ladies and promise them everlasting life.
The thing that haunts a guy is the stuff he wasn't ordered to do.
Jesus, Joseph and Mary. These Hmong broads are like badgers.
Hmong girls over here fit in better. The girls go to college and the boys go to jail.
I worked in Ford for 50 years and he sells Japanese cars.
Would it kill you to buy American?
Oh great, another ******* with an Asian girl fetish. God, this is getting so old.
Have some respect, zipperhead. We're in mourning here.
Your birthday today, Daisy. This year you have to make a choice between two life paths. Second chances comes your way. Extraordinary events culminate in what might seem to be an anticlimax. Your lucky numbers are 84, 23, 11, 78, and 99. What a load of ****.
When a man's collar is an inch too big for him I know he's ill.
Grand Hotel... always the same. People come, people go. Nothing ever happens.
We'll be goin' now that your sign is no longer impeding our forward progress.
Wherever there's a hippie, there's a crime, even if that crime hasn't happened yet. That's what I always say.
If I show up at your door, chances are you did something to bring me there.
Don't tease me, you know what I do for a living.
They all have husbands and wives and children and houses and dogs, and, you know, they've all made themselves a part of something and they can talk about what they do. What am I gonna say? "I killed the president of Paraguay with a fork. How've you been?"
I'll go put these in some rubbing alcohol.
Debi, I'm in love with you! And I know we can make this relationship work.
You're a handsome devil. What's your name?
Real smart. C'mon. Let's see how smart you are with my foot up your ***!
Don't mess with me, Porkchop.
Did he actually call himself "the talent"?
You're not a god. You can take my word for it; this is twelve years of Catholic school talking.
There is no way that this winter is *ever* going to end as long as this groundhog keeps seeing his shadow. I don't see any other way out. He's got to be stopped. And I have to stop him.
The pool on the roof must have a leak.
Never fear, I is here.
Never send a boy to do a woman's job.
If it isn't Leopard Boy and the Decepticons.
There is no right and wrong. There's only fun and boring.
You wanted to know who I am, Zero Cool? Well, let me explain the New World Order. Governments and corporations need people like you and me. We are Samurai... the Keyboard Cowboys... and all those other people who have no idea what's going on are the cattle... Moooo.
"This is our world now. The world of the electron and the switch; the beauty of the baud. We exist without nationality, skin color, or religious bias. You wage wars, murder, cheat, lie to us and try to make us believe it's for our own good, yet we're the criminals. Yes, I am a criminal. My crime is that of curiosity. I am a hacker, and this is my manifesto." Huh? Right? Manifesto? "You may stop me, but you can't stop us all."
Listen you guys, help yourself to anything in the fridge... Cereal has.
Type "cookie", you idiot.
This is the end, my friend. Thank you for calling.
Remember, hacking is more than just a crime. It's a survival trait.
I don't play well with others.
Anything else, mom? You want me to mow the lawn? Oops! I forgot, New York, No grass.
I kinda feel like God.
I hope you don't ***** like you type.
Hack the planet! Hack the planet!
Kid, don't threaten me. There are worse things than death, and uh, I can do all of them.
Since when do they let them just wander around?
Well, kiddo, I thought you outgrew superstition.
It's Halloween, everyone's entitled to one good scare.
Michael, take that thing off.
I don't care what Annie thinks. But I care what you think.
All right you meatheads, joke's over.  Come on, Annie. That's enough.  It's most definitely stopped being funny, now cut it out! You'll be sorry.
I met him, fifteen years ago. I was told there was nothing left. No reason, no conscience, no understanding; even the most rudimentary sense of life or death, good or evil, right or wrong. I met this six-year-old child, with this blank, pale, emotionless face and, the blackest eyes... the *devil's* eyes. I spent eight years trying to reach him, and then another seven trying to keep him locked up because I realized what was living behind that boy's eyes was purely and simply... *evil*.
We're not talking about any ordinary prisoner, Hoffman! We are talking about evil on two legs.
Ten years ago, he tried to kill Laurie Strode. Now he wants her daughter.
Oh come alive, Rachel. Please come alive! Don't be dead. You can't be dead. Come alive, Rachel!
Wherever she is, that little child is in mortal danger.
I got a town full of beer bellies running around in the dark with shot guns! Who's gonna be next?
You never get used to the faces. Never!
Whoever you are, I've got a big dog with me, and he bites!
Yeah, the one you're picking up, just thinkin' about him gives me the 'willies.' A decade ago-Halloween night-he murdered sixteen people, maybe more, trying to get to his sister. Nearly got her, too. But his doctor, of all people, shot him six times, then set him on fire. Both of them nearly burned to death. Yeah, I'll be glad to see this one gone. Yes, indeed-dee!
Six bodies, Sheriff, that's what I have seen! Between here and Ridgemont. An entire filling station in flames! I'm telling you Michael Myers is here, in this town! He's here to kill that little girl and anybody who gets in his way!
You're talking about him as if he were a human being. That part of him died years ago.
Spirits and powers of the flame, attend and witness this ritual. Bear our gifts to Thorn. Open us to the path of Darkness. By these runes transform us. Let the hammer descend upon the Chosen One to whom we offer this sacrifice of Innocent Blood. And then Danny, your journey begins. Kill for him!
Enough of this Michael Myers ********!
I was only 8 years old when I saw him... but I was one of the lucky ones. I survived.
Beth look out there's someone in the room, he's right behind you!
Oh god Michael, please don't hurt me.
For all my education, accomplishments and so-called wisdom, I can't fathom my own heart.
A week ago I bought a rifle, I went to the store - I bought a rifle! I was gonna, you know, if they told me I had a tumor, I was gonna kill myself. The only thing that might-ve stopped me - MIGHT'VE - is that my parents would be devastated. I would have to shoot them also, first. And then I have an aunt and uncle - you know - it would've been a blood bath.
You see the whole culture. Nazis, deodorant salesmen, wrestlers, beauty contests, a talk show. Can you imagine the level of a mind that watches wrestling? But the worst are the fundamentalist preachers. Third grade con men telling the poor suckers that watch them that they speak with Jesus, and to please send in money. Money, money, money! If Jesus came back and saw what's going on in his name, he'd never stop throwing up.
I had a great evening; it was like the Nuremberg Trials.
Listen, kid, I think you snapped your cap. Maybe you need a few weeks in Bermuda or something. Or go to a whorehouse!
How the **** do I know why there were Nazis? I don't know how the can opener works!
Naturally I get taken home first. Well, obviously he prefers April. Of course I was so tongue-tied all night. I can't believe I said that about the Guggenheim,. My stupid rollerskating joke. I should never tell jokes. Mom can tell 'em and Hannah, but I kill 'em.  Where did April come up with that stuff about Adolph Loos and terms like "organic form"?  Well, naturally. She went to Brandeis. But I don't think she knows what she's talking about. Could you believe the way she was calling him David? "Yes, David. I feel that way, too, David. What a marvelous space, David." I hate April. She's pushy.
Then at lunch she got drunker and drunker and finally she became Joan Collins!
You know, this reminds me of the time when, uh, we were just talking about something and all of a sudden started to kiss.
Aah! Spermicidally lubricated.
That wasn't a period. That was an exclamation point.
I gave you the ultimate male fantasy. ***! With nothing on the side. Don't pretend we shared anything other than fluids, Adam.
Now that we're in the middle of nowhere aren't you curious to know what it'd be like to... look into my eyes?
I'm going to row back there and see if he will shoot you. Or me. It's fine either way.
For twenty years, I've been eatin' ****; breakfast, lunch, and dinner. So now I'm changing the menu. From here on, everything I eat is gonna be ****-free.
This is for my wife. **** you and die!
How do like this, Vernon? I'd like to kill you so bad I can barely contain myself. But I've been thinking, death is far too merciful a fate for you. So what I'm going to do is put you in prison. A nice petite white boy like you in a federal penitentiary... now let me just put it this way, I don't think you'll be able to remain anal-retentive for very long.
Where's a goddamn cop when you need one?
How does it feel to know you're about to die?
We're not gonna be done until you're completely "happy."
Vice, Virtue. It's best not to be too moral. You cheat yourself out of too much *life.* Aim above morality. If you apply that to life, then you're bound to live life fully.
She provides the *whole* southwest with chicken feed!
I haven't lived. I've died a few times.
During war time, the national suicide rate goes down.
Dreyfus once wrote from Devil's Island that he would see the most glorious birds. Many years later in Brittany he realized they had only been seagulls... For me they will always be - *glorious* birds.
It's all memorabilia, but incidental and not integral, if you know what I mean.
Oh, Harold... That's *wonderful.* Go and love some more.
*Don't* get officious. You're not yourself when you're officious - That is the curse of a government job.
Harold, *everyone* has the right to make an *** out of themselves. You just can't let the world judge you too much.
Grab the shovel, Harold.
That's a lot of prepositions.
I just need you to stop being nice to me unless you're gonna marry me.
Anyone want some pie?
I do what I do best, I take scores. You do what you do best, try to stop guys like me.
Jesus God in Heaven, why'd you have to kill such hot snatch?  It's a joke man. Geez, people are so serious.  Holy Mary who art in Heaven pray for us sinners... so we don't get caught  Another joke.
You were nothing before you met me. You were playing Barbies with Betty Finn. You were a Bluebird. You were a Brownie. You were a Girl Scout Cookie.
Our love is God, let's go get a Slushie.
Ah, oh, uh! I like to suck big dicks. Or, uh... Mmmm! Mmmm! I can't get enough of 'em!
What is your damage, Heather?
Nice guys finish last, I should know.
If you were happy every day of your life you wouldn't be a human being. You'd be a game-show host.
Grow up Heather, bulimia's so '87.
Dear Diary, my teen-angst ******** now has a body count.
Whether to kill yourself or not is one of the most important decisions a teenager can make.
People will look at the ashes of Westerburg and say, "Now there's a school that self-destructed, not because society didn't care, but because the school was society." Now that's deep.
They all want me as a friend or a ****. I'm worshiped at Westerburg and I'm only a junior.
Football season is over, Veronica. Kurt and Ram had nothing left to offer the school except for date rapes and AIDS jokes.
You wanted to be a member of the most powerful clique in school. If I wasn't already the head of it, I'd want the same thing.
Intense... grow up. You think I'll drink it just because you call me chicken...? Just gimmie the cup, jerk.
Well, **** me gently with a chainsaw. Do I look like Mother Theresa?
Heather, my love, there's a new sheriff in town.
Hi, I'm sorry. Technically, I did not kill Heather Chandler, but hey who am I trying to kid, right? I just want my high school to be a nicer place. Amen. Did that sounded bitchy?
Dear Lord, please make sure this never happens to me because I don't think I could handle suicide. Fast, early acceptance into an Ivy League school and please let it be Harvard. Amen.
I prayed for the death of Heather Chandler many times and I felt bad everytime I did it but I kept doing it anyway. Now I know you understood everything. Praise Jesus, Hallelujah.
Let's pretend I blew up the school... all the schools. Now that you're dead, what are you gonna do with your life?
I knew that loose was too noose... uh... noose too loose...
It's one thing to want someone out of your life, but it's another thing to serve them a wake-up cup full of liquid drainer.
Betty Finn was a true friend and I sold her out for a bunch of Swatch dogs and Diet Coke heads. Killing Heather would be like offing the wicked witch of the west... wait east. West! God! I sound like a ******* psycho.
Great pate, mom, but I gotta motor if I wanna be ready for that party tonight.
It's so great to be able to talk to a girl and not have to ask "What's your major?". I hate that... . So, when you go to college, what subjects do you think you'll study?
All the best people have bad chests and bone diseases. It's all frightfully romantic.
We realised why Deborah and I have such extraordinary telepathy and why people treat us and look at us the way they do. It is because we are MAD. We are both stark raving MAD!
I think she knows what's going to happen. She doesn't appear to bear us any grudge.
This notion is not a new one but this time it is a definite plan which we intend to carry out. We have worked it out carefully and are both thrilled by the idea. Naturally we feel a trifle nervous, but the pleasure of anticipation is great.
We have decided how sad it is for others that they cannot appreciate our genius.
Only the best people fight against all obstacles in pursuit of happiness.
My new years resolution is a far more selfish one than last year. It is to make my motto, eat, drink and be merry for tomorrow, you may be dead
It's a three act story with a tragic end.
Absolutely not! Orson Wells! Urgh! The most hideous man alive!
She had the most beautiful eyes. I wanted to make some conversation. But I found myself asking the same old stupid questions. ... Are you from around here ?
But the most we can hope for is to get you buried in secrecy so your grave don't get violated!
I am Ard... Supreme Leader of The Revolution and Next Ruler of The World.
There was no way I was gonna walk around this place with my dork hanging out!
To defend: this is the pact. But when life loses its meaning and is taken for naught, then the pact is to avenge!
The U.N. Building. What a joke! They turned it into low rent housing. It's a dump.
If you refuse, you die; she dies... everybody dies!
The first Earth chick we see in 10 years and he has to make a play for her.
Wow, 18 years of nothing, and now twice in one day ! What a place.
Take it easy Charlie. I've got an angle.
Everybody needs money. That's why they call it money.
She could talk her way out of a sunburn.
You want to play the dozens? Huh? Here we go. There was an error at the hospital, you died at birth, your turn.
Are you ******' with me? Are you ******' with me? Or are you done ******' with me? Because I've just financialized the problem, and you've just become more trouble than you're worth.
Now all we need... is skin.
And to think... I hesitated.
Nothing personal, babe!
It is not hands that summon us. It is desire.
I recommend... amputation!
My uncle used to say that we like people for their qualities but we love them for their defects.
Seal the doors. Red and Blue are coming in.
What landed you this job, pushing "pamcakes"?
Hey. Hey. Hey. They're playing our song.
Hurts, doesn't it? You shouldn't hurt PEOPLE!
In the absence of light, darkness prevails. There are things that go bump in the night, Agent Myers. Make no mistake about that. And we are the ones who bump back.
Second date, no tongue!
What you having? Six library guards, raw, plus belts and boots. Man, you're gonna need some heavy fiber to move that out.
**** will hold no surprises for us.
Salt, gathered from the tears of a thousand angels, restraining the essence of Sammael, the Hellhound. The Seed of Destruction. This I can promise, Sammael, for every one of you that falls, two shall arise.
You killed my father, your *** is mine!
Look at the size of that whammer!
I hate those comic books. They never get the eyes right.
I'm fireproof, you're not.
Didn't I kill you already?
Marco. Marco. Get your big red butt down here!
Don't worry about fingerprints. Never had any.
This isn't for your eyes!
Come here, **** you, I want to touch you.
We'll tear your soul apart!
No tears, please. It's a waste of good suffering.
You solved the box, we came. Now you must come with us, taste our pleasures.
We had to hear it from your own lips.
We have such sights to show you!
The box. You opened it. We came.
Dreams are fleeting. Only nightmares last forever!
Welcome to the worst nightmare of all... reality!
You're freaking me out. And I'm a coroner.
This is my body, This is my blood, Happy are they who come to my supper.
I will enjoy making you bleed. And I will enjoy making you enjoy it.
In Rome today, the Pope issued a message of hope for believers in their fight against what he termed the godless and lost. He did not mention Simon Grimm by name, but offered a prayer for the young, whom he described as sadly in need of faith and not the illusion of conviction offered by rock music, drugs and contemporary poetry.
An honest man is always in trouble, remember that Simon.
Opportunity will move out of the way to let a man pass it by.
I learn so much from these magazines Mr. Dang, and I refuse to discriminate between modes of knowing.
Certain work needs to be experienced all at once in order for one to appreciate the full force of it's character.
Look, Simon, I made love to your mother about half an hour ago, and now I'm beginning to think that maybe it wasn't such a good idea.
I've been bad. Repeatedly.
You can't argue about taste.
You see Simon, there's three kinds of "there". There's "there", t-h-e-r-e: "There are the donuts." Then there's "their", t-h-e-i-r, which is the possessive: "It is their donut." Then finally, there's "they're", t-h-e-y-apostrophe-r-e. A contraction meaning: "They're... they're the donut people." Got it?
The world is full of **** indeed.
You remember when I said how I was gonna explain about life, buddy? Well the thing about life is, it gets weird. People are always talking ya about truth. Everybody always knows what the truth is, like it was toilet paper or somethin', and they got a supply in the closet. But what you learn, as you get older, is there ain't no truth. All there is is ********, pardon my vulgarity here. Layers of it. One layer of ******** on top of another. And what you do in life like when you get older is, you pick the layer of ******** that you prefer and that's your ********, so to speak.
Have you ever heard more ******** or drivel coming from somebody who is not even the president?
I know why it's raining. I coulda predicted it. It's raining because my ******* wipers are all ****** up. If my wipers were okay, the ******* sun would be shining, AT NIGHT.
You're a god **** saint, John. Pardon the vulgarity.
All I'm saying is, you have to allow for things to happen to people, but most of all to yourself. And you don't Bob, so what's the use?
I lost it. I lost it all- faith, dignity... about 15 pounds.
...I agreed that what really matters is what you like, not what you are like... Books, records, films - these things matter. Call me shallow but it's the ******' truth, and by this measure I was having one of the best dates of my life.
I never thought I'd say this, but can I go work now?
If you *really* wanted to ***** me up, you should've gotten to me earlier.
It would be nice to think that since I was 14, times have changed. Relationships have become more sophisticated. Females less cruel. Skins thicker. Instincts more developed. But there seems to be an element of that afternoon in everything that's happened to me since. All my romantic stories are a scrambled version of that first one.
Rob, top five musical crimes perpetuated by Stevie Wonder in the '80s and '90s. Go. Sub-question: is it in fact unfair to criticize a formerly great artist for his latter day sins, is it better to burn out or fade away?
You are as abandoned and noisy as any character in a **** film, Laura. You are Ian's plaything, responding to his touch with shrieks of orgasmic delight. No woman in the history of the world is having better *** than *** you are having with Ian... in my head.
I could've wound up having *** back there. And what better way to exorcise rejection demons than to ***** the person who rejected you, right? But you wouldn't be sleeping with a person, you'd be sleeping with the whole sad, single-person culture. It'd be like sleeping with Talia Shire in Rocky if you weren't Rocky.
I knew there was a reason I wore a skirt today.
If your God should persecute me into the next world, then I shall simply have to find myself another.
Faith, I told you I look like a ******* orange.
Look back at the endless travesties of your life, and you'll see me, always there waiting in the shadows. When friends and lovers are wiped from your sight, I'm there. When those you cherish die abruptly and for no reason, I'm there for you.
Walter, you're wonderful, in a loathsome sort of way.
Mighty nice little town, Albany. They've got the state capitol there, you know.
If you was worth breaking my nails on I'd tear your face wide open.
Listen to me, you great big bubble-headed baboon!
A big fat lummox like you hiring an airplane to write: "Hildy, don't be hasty. Remember my dimple. Walter." Delayed our divorce 20 minutes while the judge went out and watched it.
Madam, you are a ****-eyed liar!
Oh, you're losing your arm! You used to be able to pitch better than that.
You think you're God? I'll show you God!
I have no friends, only relations!
It must be some kind of hot tub time machine...
There will be no rescue, no intervention for us. We can only save ourselves. Many of you know influential people abroad, you must call these people. You must tell them what will happen to us... say goodbye. But when you say goodbye, say it as if you are reaching through the phone and holding their hand. Let them know that if they let go of that hand, you will die. We must shame them into sending help.
Oh, God, I'm so ashamed!
What are you, Jimmy Olsen, cub reporter for the Daily *******?
Wakey, wakey, eggs and bakey!
Boy, I bet you'd stick your head in fire if I told ya you could see ****. Meanwhile, you're too stupid to realize you got a demon stickin' out your *** singing, "Holy Miss Moley,  Got me a live one."
Goddamn, ************ got blood all over my best clown suit.
These are all my dolls. I used to like to chop their heads off and their arms and stick 'em up on the wall.
My baby boy gets shy around new people, but he'll warm up to you, especially the girls!  He's a real lady KILLER!
Price didn't make the list, the house did... Cause she's a vengeful stupid *****!
Sure is a funky old house, ain't it?
Ever see one that starts at the top? 20 stories worth of top.
Jesus, she's dead. She was cute too. God, I'd love to get laid before I die.  How you doin' tonight?  Yeah, I'm alright.
Guess old Melissa found what she was looking for.
I lied. The house is alive. We're all gonna die.
There's been a murder almost everyplace in this house!
What good is a million dollars when you're dead?
Your mother would have wanted you to have it. It's half her breastplate.  Part of a set. Keeps her close.
You've thrown your lot in with them. You're not a viking. You're not my son.
All right, I admit it. This is pretty cool. It's... *amazing*. He's amazing.
Thank you, for summing that up
Oh, the gods hate me. Some people lose their knife or their mug, no not me! I manage to lose an entire dragon.
Oh, I'm hurt! I am very much hurt!
Oh, wow... I-I did it! Oh, I did it! This-this fixes everything! *Yes*!  I have brought down this mighty beast...!
Most people would leave, but not us. We're Vikings. We have stubbornness issues.
Don't worry. You're small and you're weak. That'll make you less of a target! They'll see you as sick or insane and go after the more viking-like teens instead.
I'm really beginning to question your teaching methods.
Everything we know about you guys is wrong.
Well, it's satisfying to know that all our food has been dumped down a hole.
Chances of survival are dwindling into single-digits now...
Listen, Hawk, this might be hard to believe, but I'm just a regular Joe. I just want to be happy. And happiness comes from the achievement of goals. It's just that when you've made your first billion by the age of nineteen, it's hard to keep coming up with new ones. But now, finally, I've got myself a new goal... World domination!
I hated cigarettes until I saw my first NO SMOKING sign. Keep off the grass? Let's play soccer. The law I cared for was friendship. I broke that one too, didn't I.
The man knows! The man knows!
If the Mario brothers weren't New Jersey's third-largest crime family, I'd say, "Kiss my ***." But considering your status, I will say, "Slurp my butt."
I'll torture you so slowly, you'll think it's a career.
You know they invented something while you were inside? It's called "the watch".
Is looking like a constipated warthog a prerequisite for getting a job in the art world?
I want to make it up to you, kid. That's why I got you this gig. And in the words of the late, great Karen Carpenter, "we've only just begun."
You **** my freedom for a lousy job?
Apes don't assasinate their presidents, gentlemen!
I'm an ape, mother. Apes don't drop lines.
You must choose. It is like that movie "Sofie's Choice" only it is Nathan's choice. Do you know that movie, "Sofie's Choice"? It is like that. Only it is this.
I play a lot of XBOX.
Yeah. It's an outgoing message so I think you need to sound a little more outgoing.
Sam, I can go at least another nine rounds, but you got to let me in.
All you need is love.
It's just... I've never lost at anything.
You think you've got the market cornered on human suffering? Let me tell you something about people like me. People like me feel lost, and little, and ugly, and dispensable. People like me have husbands, ******** other people far more perfect than me. People like me have sons who hate them. And I've screamed, I've screamed horrible things at him, at a 7 year old because he doesn't want to get in the car at the end of the day! And then he looks at me with such anger and I hate him then! I know I'm failing you! I know I'm disappointing you! I know you deserve better but get in the ******* car! It's like every morning I wake up and, I fail. And I look around and everybody seems to be pulling it off, but I-I-I can't! No matter how hard I try. Somehow, I'll never be enough.
Sam, you gotta be firm on this.
Enough romance. Let's ****!
I love you, Phillip Morris! I love you!
Love sure is a funny thing. Makes you happy, makes you sad, makes you do all sorts of things you never thought you'd do before. In fact, love's the reason I'm laying here dying.
Hush, child. No more screaming, no more running, it's time to die!
Every guy in history who tried to pick up a girl did the good-friend thing first.
This island didn't have a murder rate until you people showed up!
Great, cancer in a box.
Don't worry about a sugar planter. Give him a horse and he'll ride to his own funeral.
I walked with a zombie... sounds strange to say.
Thank you... you said 'someone'... not 'something'.
OK. Your phone is off, but there's been a catastrofuck here. Someone's leaked Liza Weld's PWIP PIP paper to the BBC. I reckon it's going to be on the six o'clock news, one o'clock your time. That is going to ******* fist your UN vote to death. Right. Missing you loads. PWIP PIP toodle-oo.
This is the minister of international development here, he should be talking about... food parcels... not... *******, ****-spraying mayhem!
I just got off the phone with Linton, who proceeded to ***** me out for allowing "I Heart Huckabees" on the troops' DVD roster. Yeah. You know that phrase, "I'm too old for this ****"? Well, I'm too young for this ****. You know?
Christ on a bendy-bus. Don't be such a ******* faff ****.
Simon, I don't like finding out about people employed by this government via the news unless they've just died. Be here, now,
In the words of the late, great Nat King ******* Cole, unforeseeable, that's what you are.
No, no, no, you needn't worry about the Canadians, they're just happy to be there.  Yes, well, they always look surprised when they're invited.
I can't stand to see a woman bleed from the mouth. It reminds me of that Country & Western music which I cannot abide.
"Climbing the mountain of conflict"? You sounded like a **** Julie Andrews!
Linton has set up a secret war committee. I just know it. I mean, Linton is an absolute lunatic, Liza. He is dangerous. The voices in his head are now sing barbershop together.
Well, I don't want to be accused of micro-managing, but I cannot understand why "I Heart Huckabees" is on a list of DVDs considered suitable for armed-forces entertainment. That self-indulgent **** is not suitable for combat troops.
He's got his little cannons and he's got his little guns, and... This is the problem with civilians wanting to go to war. Once you've been there, once you've seen it, you never want to go again unless you absolutely ******* have to. It's like France.
This is the vault. Or as some of us like to call it: The Freak Show.
If I had known I was gonna meet the president I would've worn a tie. Look at me, I look like a schliemiel.
And I always thought THESE were gonna kill me.
*That's* what you get! Ha Ha! Look at you! Ya ship's all banged up!  Who's the man? Huh? Who's the man? Wait till I get another plane! I'm a line ya friends up right beside you! Where ya at, huh? Where ya at?   Welcome to earth.
If we don't act now, we may not have much of an America left to defend.
Everyone's trying to get out of Washington, and we're the only schmucks trying to get in.
Now that's what I call a close encounter
A toast, to the end of the world.
It's Air Force One for crying out loud and still he gets sick!
All you need is love, John Lennon, smart man, shot in the back very sad.
How does one get off this thing?
Our situation has not improved.
You call *this* archaeology?
Look at this! I've gone and caught a sniffle!
Ask yourself, why do you seek the Cup of Christ? Is it for His glory, or for yours?
I was just remembering the last time we had a quiet drink together. I had a milkshake.
"X" never, ever marks the spot.
The search for the Grail is the search for the divine in all of us. But if you want facts, Indy, I've none to give you. At my age, I'm prepared to take a few things on faith.
I'm like a bad penny, I always turn up.
Nazis. I hate these guys.
She ransacked her own room, and I fell for it!
Is there anyone here who speaks English? Or maybe even ancient Greek?
Sallah, I said *no* camels. That's *five* camels. Can't you count?
Archaeology is the search for fact... not truth. If it's truth you're looking for, Dr. Tyree's philosophy class is right down the hall.
I suddenly remembered my Charlemagne. Let my armies be the rocks and the trees and the birds in the sky...
Listen. Since I've met you I've nearly been incinerated, drowned, shot at, and chopped into fish bait. We're caught in the middle of something sinister here, my guess is dad found out more than he was looking for and until I'm sure, I'm going to continue to do things the way I think they should be done.
Compensation for my brother-in-law's car!
But choose wisely, for while the true Grail will bring you life, the false Grail will take it from you.
And in this sort of race, there's no silver medal for finishing second.
You have chosen... wisely. But, beware: the Grail cannot pass beyond the Great Seal, for that is the boundry, and the price, of immortality.
I trust your trip down was comfortable, Dr Jones. My men didn't alarm you, I hope.
My son, we're pilgrims in an unholy land.
Petroleum... I should stick a well down here and retire.
Does anyone understand a word I'm saying here?
I misjudged you, Walter. I knew you would sell your mother for an Etruscan vase. But I didn't know you would sell out your country and your soul... to the slime of humanity.
You are in a position unsuitable to give orders.
Dr. Jones, in our country, it's not usual for a guest to insult his host.
Mola Ram! Prepare to meet Kali... in ****!
Kali Ma protects us! We are her children! We pledge our devotion to her with an offering of flesh... and blood!
You don't believe me, Dr. Jones? You will, Dr. Jones. You will become a true believer.
I should say you look rather lost, but then I can't imagine where in the world the three of you would look at home.
Too much to drink, Dr. Jones?
Monsieur LaPadite, to both your family and your cows I say: Bravo.
I'm gonna give you a little somethin' you can't take off.
It's only the offspring of slaves that allows America to be competitive athletically. American Olympic gold can be measured in Negro sweat.
I have no doubt, and yes, some Germans will die, and yes, it will ruin the evening, and yes, Goebbels will be very, very, very mad at you for what you've done to his big night. But you won't get Hitler, you won't get Goebbels, you won't get Goering and you won't get Bormann. And you need all four to end the war. But if I do pick up that phone right there, you may very well get all four. And if you get all four, you end the war... tonight.  So, gentlemen, let's discuss the prospect of ending the war tonight.
You either do what the **** we tell you, or I'll bury this axe in your collaborating skull.
I love rumors! Facts can be so misleading, where rumors, true or false, are often revealing.
I can vouch for everything the young captain has just said. He *does* hail from the bottom of Piz Palu. He *was* in the film, and his brother *is* far more handsome than he.
My name is Shosanna Dreyfus and THIS is the face... of Jewish vengeance!
Who wants to send a message to Germany?
It's been a pleasure chatting with a fellow cinema lover.
Bring that ****** over here!
What a tremendously hostile world that a rat must endure. Yet not only does he survive, he thrives. Because our little foe has an instinct for survival and preservation second to none... And that Monsieur is what a Jew shares with a rat.
You know somethin', Utivich? I think this just might be my masterpiece.
You probably heard we ain't in the prisoner-takin' business; we in the killin' **** business. And cousin, business is a-boomin'.
We have all our rotten eggs in one basket. The objective of the operation: blow up the basket.
I can't judge. There are two kinds of people in Alaska: those who were born here and those who come here to escape something. I wasn't born here.
You lack the courage of your convictions sir, do it.
I came to make peace with you, even though you are the father of lies.
Who will take care of me my love, my dark angel, when you are gone?
They know about us. They watch us dine on empty plates and drink from empty glasses.
So you want me to tell you the story of my life?
Her blood coursed through my veins sweeter than life itself. And as it did, Lestat's words made sense to me. I knew peace only when I killed and when I heard her heart in that terrible rhythm, I knew again what peace could be.
That morning I was not yet a vampire, and I saw my last sunrise. I remember it completely, and yet I can't recall any sunrise before it. I watched the whole magnificence of the dawn for the last time as if it were the first. And then I said farewell to sunlight, and set out to become what I became.
Your body's dying. Pay no attention, It happens to us all.
Evil is a point of view. God kills indiscriminately and so shall we. For no creatures under God are as we are, none so like him as ourselves.
I walked all night, I walked as I had walked years before when my mind swarmed with guilt at the thought of killing. I had thought of all the things I had done, and couldn't undo. And I longed for a moments peace.
So it was, when I'd given up the search for vampires, that a vampire found me.
A little child she was, but also a fierce killer, now capable of the ruthless pursuit of blood with all a child's demanding.
I know nothing of God, or the Devil. I have never seen a vision nor learned a secret that will **** or save my soul. And as far as I know, after four hundred years, I am the oldest living vampire in the world.
How do we seem to you? Do you find us beautiful, magical? Our white skin, our fierce eyes? "Drink" you ask me, do you have any idea of the thing you will become?
Suppose death had a heart to love and to release you, to whom would he turn this passion, would you chose a person from the crowd there. A person to suffer as you suffer.
Feed on what you will. Rats, chickens, poodles, I'll leave you to it and watch you come around. But just remember, life without me would be even more unbearable.
My God, I've failed again.
It's so easy you almost feel sorry for them. You'll get used to killing. Just forget about that mortal coil. You'll become accustomed to it, all too quickly.
Do you know what his soul said to me, without saying a word? 'Let him go', he said 'Let him go'.
It's time we were on our way. I'm hungry, and the city awaits.
All I need to find you Louis, is follow the corpses of rats.
We are predators, Whose all seeing eyes were meant to give them detachment.
In the spring of 1988, I returned to New Orleans, and as soon as I smelled the air, I knew I was home. It was rich, almost sweet, like the scent of jasmine and roses around our old courtyard. I walked the streets, savoring that long lost perfume.
Goodnight sweet prince, may flights of devils wing you to your rest.
Though the fire seemed to spread through the quarter, I stood on that deck, fearful he would come out again from the very river, like some monster, to destroy us both. And all the while, I thought, 'Lestat, you deserve your vengeance. You gave me the dark gift, and I delivered you into the hands of death for the second time.'
I'm going to paraphrase Thoreau here... rather than love, than money, than faith, than fame, than fairness... give me truth.
I'm supertramp.  and you're super apple!
I'm gonna nail your ***!
Told him it was no go...
Hmm... Hmm... Yes, your husband did show remarkable foresight in taking those pictures. And, yes, absent a swimming pool, the presence of a pool man would appear to be suspicious. But, Madam, who is the real victim here? Let me suggest to you the following. Your husband, who on a prior occasion had slapped you, beat you.
Well, I think it stinks. They left you with nothing. Makes you wonder about the entire legal system. Like Rodney... Whatshisname.
Let me rephrase. Mrs. Rexroth, have you ever been in love?
You look like a clown. He looks like a clown, mom, and he doesn't even know it.
Hey, Jacey... Remember that time I got my **** caught in my zipper?
You do realize you may be the only person at this party with artificial sideburns?
Look, I'm not rich. My father is. And I don't pick my father. And if I had a choice between having tons of money or having another father, I'd be absolutely deligthed to be poor. But unfortunately, life is just not a cafeteria.
Backyard nudity is hypocritical. It's insincere. People should do and say exactly what they feel and think and not try to hide things.
You didn't know your mother at all if you think someone like me would ever stood a chance with someone like her.
You know, I had you pegged right from the jump. Just a spoiled brat of a rich father. The only way you get anything is to buy it, isn't it? You're in a jam and all you can think of is your money. It never fails, does it? Ever hear of the word humility? No, you wouldn't. I guess it would never occur to you to just say, 'Please mister, I'm in trouble, will you help me?' No, that would bring you down off your high horse for a minute. Well, let me tell you something, maybe it will take a load off your mind. You don't have to worry about me. I'm not interested in your money or your problem. You, King Westley, your father. You're all a lot of hooey to me!
That's the way things go: you think you got a great yarn, and something comes along and messes up the finish - and there you are.
Ohh, there must be some easier way for me to get my wings.
A toast to my big brother George: The richest man in town.
I know what I'm gonna do tomorrow, and the next day, and the next year, and the year after that.
Where's that money, you silly stupid old fool? Where's that money? Do you realize what this means? It means bankruptcy and scandal and prison! That's what it means! One of us is going to jail... well, it's not gonna be me!
Look at you. You used to be so cocky. You were going to go out and conquer the world. You once called me "a warped, frustrated, old man!" What are you but a warped, frustrated young man? A miserable little clerk crawling in here on your hands and knees and begging for help. No securities, no stocks, no bonds. Nothin' but a miserable little $500 equity in a life insurance policy.  You're worth more dead than alive!
Just a minute... just a minute. Now, hold on, Mr. Potter. You're right when you say my father was no businessman. I know that. Why he ever started this cheap, penny-ante Building and Loan, I'll never know. But neither you nor anyone else can say anything against his character, because his whole life was... why, in the 25 years since he and his brother, Uncle Billy, started this thing, he never once thought of himself. Isn't that right, Uncle Billy? He didn't save enough money to send Harry away to college, let alone me. But he did help a few people get out of your slums, Mr. Potter, and what's wrong with that? Why... here, you're all businessmen here. Doesn't it make them better citizens? Doesn't it make them better customers? You... you said... what'd you say a minute ago? They had to wait and save their money before they even ought to think of a decent home. Wait? Wait for what? Until their children grow up and leave them? Until they're so old and broken down that they... Do you know how long it takes a working man to save $5,000? Just remember this, Mr. Potter, that this rabble you're talking about... they do most of the working and paying and living and dying in this community. Well, is it too much to have them work and pay and live and die in a couple of decent rooms and a bath? Anyway, my father didn't think so. People were human beings to him. But to you, a warped, frustrated old man, they're cattle. Well in my book, my father died a much richer man than you'll ever be!
You call this a happy family? Why do we have to have all these kids?
Strange, isn't it? Each man's life touches so many other lives. When he isn't around he leaves an awful hole, doesn't he?
I owe everything to George Bailey. Help him, dear Father.
Boys and girls and music. Why do they need gin?
Dear Father in heaven, I'm not a praying man, but if you're up there and you can hear me  show me the way... show me the way.
What's the matter, Othello - jealous? Did you know there's a swimming pool under this floor? And did you know that *button* behind you causes this floor to open up? And did you further know that George Bailey is dancing right over that crack?  I've got the key!
Watch this guy, Bert, he's bats!
You've been given a great gift, George: A chance to see what the world would be like without you.
Well, you look about the kind of angel I'd get. Sort of a fallen angel, aren't you? What happened to your wings?
I wish I had a million dollars... Hot dog!
I been savin' this money for a divorce, if ever I got a husband.
After all, Potter, some people like George HAD to stay at home. Not every heel was in Germany and Japan.
Get me. I'm givin' out wings!
I feel like a bootlegger's wife!
Isn't it wonderful? I'm going to jail!
Is it really necessary for you to always say no before you say yes?
Ordell, this isn't a bar. You don't have a tab.
Now that there is the Tec-9, a crappy spray gun from South Miami. This gun is advertised as the most popular gun in American crime. Do you believe that ****? It actually says that in the little book that comes with it: the most popular gun in American crime. Like they're actually proud of that ****.
I'm 56 years old. I can't blame anybody else for something I did.
Try not to tear his clothes off, OK? They're new.
What the **** happened to you, man? ****, your *** used to be beautiful!
My money's in that office, right? If she start giving me some ******** about it ain't there, and we got to go someplace else and get it, I'm gonna shoot you in the head then and there. Then I'm gonna shoot that ***** in the kneecaps, find out where my goddamn money is. She gonna tell me too. Hey, look at me when I'm talking to you, ************. You listen: we go in there, and that ***** Winston or anybody else is in there, you the first ************ to get shot. You understand?
Well, I've flown seven million miles. And I've been waiting on people almost 20 years. The best job I could get after my bust was Cabo Air, which is the worst job you can get in this industry. I make about sixteen thousand, with retirement benefits that ain't worth a ****. And now with this arrest hanging over my head, I'm scared. If I lose my job I gotta start all over again, but I got nothing to start over with. I'll be stuck with whatever I can get. And that **** is scarier than Ordell.
Uh uh uh... I didn't hear you wash your hands.
****, Jackie. You come in this place on Saturday night I bet you need ****** repellant to keep motherfuckers off your ***.
Is white guilt supposed to make me forget that I run a business?
You know, a good cop will never let you know he knows you're full of ****.
Half a million dollars will always be missed.
Somebody with a grudge blew Beaumont's brains out. Oh ****, that **** rhymes! "Blew Beau-mont's, brains out!"
Shut your raggedy-*** up, and sit the **** down!
My *** may be dumb, but I ain't no dumbass.
You can't trust Melanie but you can trust Melanie to be Melanie.
Jesus, but if you two are not the biggest pair of ****-ups I've ever met in my entire life. How did you ever rob a bank? When you robbed banks, did you forget where your car was then too? No wonder you went to jail.
Mr. Singer. What an appropriate name for a man who can't shut up.
See. According to this, you're already dead.
If you're frightened of dying, and you're holding on, you'll see devils tearing your life away. If you've made your peace, then the devils are really angels, freeing you from the Earth.
I'll have a Voorhees burger and a side of Jason fingers.
That, what we call it in the books, is ******** the pooch! Iron this punk!
I've seen enough horror movies to know any weirdo wearing a mask is never friendly.
Don't **** me off, junior, or I WILL repaint this office with your brains.
It's gonna take more than a poke in the ribs to put down this old dog.  Yeah, that oughta do it.
Here's to swimmin' with bow-legged women.
Break it up will ya', Chief! Daylight's wastin'.
My husband tells me you're in sharks.
I'm not talkin' 'bout pleasure boatin' or day sailin'. I'm talkin' 'bout workin' for a livin'. I'm talkin' 'bout sharkin'!
I'm pleased and happy to repeat the news that we have, in fact, caught and killed a large predator that supposedly injured some bathers. But, as you see, it's a beautiful day, the beaches are open and people are having a wonderful time. Amity, as you know, means "friendship".
Here lies the body of Mary Lee; died at the age of a hundred and three. For fifteen years she kept her virginity; not a bad record for this vicinity.
Get out the bankets, I'm getting black and blue marks all over my butt, and my moms starting to get uptight about them!
Come and get me, you son of a *****!
If I go any faster this thing will turn into a flying Cuisinart and we'll all be diced into oblivion!
I've always wanted to make love to an angry welder. I've dreamed of nothing else since I was a small boy.
Why in God's name would I wanna keep writing about characters whose central preoccupation are weed and **** and **** jokes? I mean, ya gotta grow man. Don't you ever want anything more for yourself? I know this poor hapless son of a ***** does. I look into his sorry doe eyes and I just, I see a man crying out. He's crying out, "When Lord? When the **** can your servant ditch this foul-mouthed little chucklehead to whom I am a constant victim of his folly, so much so that it prevents him from ever getting to kiss a girl! ****! When, Lord when? WHENS GONNA BE MY TIME?"
Don't you never say an unkind word about the Time! Me and Silent Bob modeled our whole ******* lives around Morris Day and Jerome. I'm a smooth pimp who loves the *****. And Tubby here is my black man servant. What?
I can't belive this ****. Five hours and not a single ride. Every day people hitch to Hollywood to stop studios from making films about 'em, but when you and me try it, it's like we're trapped in a ******' cartoon.
What's your damage, little boy? You've got a sick and twisted world perspective.
Ladies, Ladies, Ladies, Jay and Silent Bob are in the hizzouse!
And on that note, we cue the music.
Just call me Darth Balls... Bong.
Nights like this... I miss dating a *******.
This is a site populated by militant movie buffs: sad, pathetic little ******** living in their parents' basement downloading scripts and what they think is inside information about movies and actors they claim to despise yet can't stop discussing.
Hi, Ray and Rirent Rob.
I can't believe I'm gonna get some ***** for stealin' the monkey.  Stealin' the little monkey. Man, if I woulda known that, I would have been stealin' monkeys since I was like, seven and ****.
I said you LOVE the ****. I must be the craftiest ************ alive.
Hey Mr. Science Guy... don't spray that aerosol in my eye... for... for I... I don't really wanna die. I'm a noble rabbit...
All you motherfuckers are gonna pay. You are the ones who are the ball-lickers. We're gonna **** your mothers while you watch and cry like little *******. Once we get to Hollywood and find those Miramax ***** who are making that movie, we're gonna make 'em eat our ****, then **** out our ****, then eat their **** which is made up of our **** that we made 'em eat. Then you're all you motherfucks are next. Love, Jay and Silent Bob.
**** this *******. Let's go back to the station house and cornhole us a drunk
Wow. That was just an incredibly daring escape.
See? I told you that restraining order was a good idea.
**** Jay and Silent Bob. **** them up their stupid asses.
Are we gonna have a problem... again?
Affleck, you the *bomb* in Phantoms yo!
I think George Lucas gonna sue somebody.
I think I would recognize an ape if I saw one and the only thing I see right now is a political fiasco that I'm about to avoid by letting this buttfuckin' Brady Bunch go!
Hey, watch the language, little boy. There's females present.
See? If you were funnier than that, ABC wouldn't have cancelled us.
Oh Yeah! Oh Yeah! You chug that *** ****, baby. You need two hands. Oh, you like that, MULE. Mules are... GOOD!
I hope one rips the other one's shirt off and we see some ****** titties floppin around, yeah!
I'm gonna finger-bang her tight little ******* / Finger-bang and tea-bag my balls / Where, where, in her mouth / Balls a-plenty in her mouth / Balls Balls Sweaty Balls
Crazy crackers with guns. Its time I get my black *** out of here.
Kaboom, you little stoner *****!
Dude, I think I just filled the cup.
I don't get out to the movies that much, but "Bluntman and Chronic" was blunt-tastic.
Plaschke, this is Willenholly. I need you to get me on the national news, pronto. Why? Because we may very well be dealing with the two most dangerous men on the planet.
Y'know, I don't get you, Justice. You used to be into all this girl stuff. Stealing, boning, blowing **** up, and now you're like this little priss with a conscience. It's really a ******* drag.
Holy ****! The little stoner was right!
I suppose I'm drinking myself sober.
Find yourself a farmer's daughter with nice big ******* **** and shake that bye-bye.
These are like smart bombs, you point them in the right direction and **** gets real.
You're totally lesbi-***.
Do you buy all your murder weapons at Home Depot? God, your butch!
I can take care of myself. I've been using the Bowflex.
And sometimes, you might just get lucky in your miserable life.
Stop kidnapping my girlfriend!
I mean, they did go all "Benihana" on my *** with that knife, and it should've killed me, but for some reason... it didn't.
You need a mani bad. You should find a Chinese chick to buff your situation.
Needy, I care about you. As a person, not just some girl I made love to for four minutes the other night, and I'm scared of what's happening to you.
You knock it off, Chip! You're ***** cheese!
I dreamed some bad people were trying to nail you to a tree with hammers and big stakes and ****. Just like J.C. But I didn't let 'em get to you, 'cause I'm a hard-assed, Ford-tough mama bear.
The whole country got a huge tragedy boner for Devil's Kettle.
I need you frightened.  I need you hopeless.
Who cares about Jennifer, and those douche-bags with their douche-bag haircuts and their man-scara? People just burned to death!
Yes. Yes, I'm a virgin. I'm a virgin. I've never even done ***. I don't even know how. So, you guys should find somebody. Who does. Know how.
It smells like Thai food in here. Have you guys been *******?
Boo! Cross out Needy!
Jump in my nightmare, the water's warm!
Maybe love shouldn't be such hard work.
You tell me to eat lima beans, I'll eat lima beans
I got a shelf life of ten years, tops. My next contract's gotta bring me the dollars that'll last me and mine a long time. ****, I'm out of this sport in 5 years. What's my family gonna live on? Huh?
But if anybody else wants to come with me, this moment will be the ground floor of something real and fun and inspiring and true in this godforsaken business and we will do it together! Who's coming with me besides... "Flipper" here?
That's more than a dress. That's an Audrey Hepburn movie.
You are hanging on by a very thin thread and I dig that about you!
Have you ever gotten the feeling that you aren't completely embarassed yet, but you glimpse tomorrow's embarrassment?
Well, I'm sorry but please remove your **** from my ***!
Anyone else would have left you by now, but I'm sticking with you. And if I have to ride your *** like Zorro, you're gonna show me the money.
I'm sorry, I'm just a little pregnant here.
There is a sensitivity thing that some people have. I don't have it. I don't cry at movies, I don't gush over babies, I don't buy Christmas presents 5 months early, and I DON'T tell the guy who just ruined both our lives, "Oh, poor baby." But I do love you.
I am out here for you. You don't know what it's like to be ME out here for YOU. It is an up-at-dawn, pride-swallowing siege that I will never fully tell you about, ok?
So this is the world, and there are almost six billion people on it. When I was a kid, there were three. It's hard to keep up.
It's not "show friends." It's show *business*.
Jerry Maguire... How'm I doing? I'm sweating, dude! I'm sweatin' my contract! I'm sweating Bob Sugar calling me, telling me I'm missing the big endorsements by being with you! THAT'S how I'm doing - I'm sweating, dude!
The key to this business is personal relationships.
That's how you become great, man. Hang your balls out there!
I'm not trying to make history here.
Don't worry, I'm not gonna do what you all think I'm gonna do, which is, you know, FLIP OUT!
I won't let you get rid of me.
Don't ever stop ******* me!
You bet on me like I bet on you.
Could the Mob change the parade route, Bill, or eliminate the protection for the President? Could the Mob send Oswald to Russia and get him back? Could the Mob get the FBI the CIA, and the Dallas Police to make a mess of the investigation? Could the Mob appoint the Warren Commission to cover it up? could the Mob wreck the autopsy? Could the Mob influence the national media to go to sleep? And since when has the Mob used anything but .38's for hits, up close. The Mob wouldn't have the guts or the power for something of this magnitude. Assassins need payrolls, orders, times, schedules. This was a military-style ambush from start to finish... a coup d'etat with Lyndon Johnson waiting in the wings.
You know, I must say, we have heard some strange things coming out of your office in New Orleans. First, we heard that the Cuban exiles killed the President. Then the mob. Now your latest theory seems to be that the CIA, the FBI, and the Pentagon, and the White House, all combined in some elaborate conspiracy to kill John Kennedy. Let me ask you, is there anyone besides Lee Harvey Oswald who you think *didn't* conspire to kill the president?
You as crazy as your mama. Goes to show it's in the genes.
I didn't think much about it at the time. Just ********, y'know, everybody likes to make themselves out to be something more than they are. 'Specially in the homosexual underworld. But when they got him I got real scared. And that's when I got popped.
At the time of the shooting there seemed to be some commotion... I just am unable to describe - a flash of light or smoke or something which caused me to feel that something out of the ordinary had occurred there on the embankment...
Clay Bertrand is Clay Shaw?
Under the guise of a patriotic club-owner out to spare Jackie Kennedy from having to testify at trial, Jack Ruby is shown his way into an underground parking garage by one of his inside men on the Dallas Police Force, and when he is ready Lee Harvey Oswald is brought out like a sacrificial lamb and nicely disposed of as an enemy of the people.
Is this off the record, Daddy-O?
"One may smile and smile and be a villain."
About as subtle as a cockroach crawlin' across a white rug!
The hospital is under new management now! Free health care for everyone!
No goodbye, you know I don't like goodbyes. See you later!
Hey there, big puffy version of Junebug!
Thanks for having me and my irresponsible child over your house.
Yum, this pretzel tastes like a freaking DONUT!
As far as boyfriends go, Paulie Bleeker is totally boss. He is the cheese to my macaroni. And, I know that people are supposed to fall in love before they reproduce, but... I guess normalcy isn't really our style.
All babies want to get borned! All babies want to get borned!
Oh and you know what? I bought another Sonic Youth album and it sucked... it's just noise.
Bleeker's mom was possibly attractive once, but now she looks like a Hobbit. You know, the fat one, that was in the Goonies.
You're quite the sellout, Mark. I mean... what would the Melvins say?
Hi, I'm calling to procure a hasty abortion...
Yeah I came as soon as I got that ultrasound goo off my pelvis. It was crazy actually, my step-mom verbally abused the ultrasound tech and we got escorted off the premises.
Liberty Bell, if you put one more Baco on that potato, I'm gonna kick your little monkey butt.
I could so go for like a huge cookie right now, with like, a lamb kabob simultaneously.
This is the most magnificent discarded living room set I've ever seen.
You seem to be getting pregnanter these days.
You should try talking to it. 'Cause, like, supposedly they can hear you even though it's all, like, ten-thousand leagues under the sea.
I never realize how much I like being home unless I've been somewhere really different for a while.
It ended with a chair.
They were Mark and Vanessa Loring. And they were beautiful even in black and white.
You better pay for that pee-stick when you're done with it. Don't think it's yours just because you marked it with your urine!
Doctors are ******* who like to play God and watch lesser people scream.
Wow! That shirt's workin' hard.
Can I use the facilities? Because being pregnant makes me pee like Seabiscuit!
Oh, and she inexplicably mails me a cactus every Valentine's Day. And I'm like, "Thanks a heap coyote ugly. This cactus-gram stings even worse than your abandonment."
I think that kids get bored and have intercourse.
When I see them all running like that, with their things bouncing around in their shorts, I always picture them naked, even if I don't want to. All i see is pork swords.
You should've gone to China, you know, 'cause I hear they give away babies like free iPods. You know, they pretty much just put them in those t-shirt guns and shoot them out at sporting events.
Why does everyone think yellow is gender neutral? I never knew a guy with a yellow room.
Mr. Hammond, the phones are working.
Dr. Grant, know something Dr. Grant? Billy was right.
If we split up, I'm going with you guys.
Reverse Darwinism - survival of the most idiotic.
On this island there is no such thing as safe.
Fine, go ahead and scream and when that "Tricikloplots" attacks you, don't come crying to me.
Now, are there any questions?  Questions not related to Jurassic Park.  Or the incident in San Diego, which I did not witness.
Tell me, big shot, how you gonna write a book about something you know nothing about?
I like your hair 'cause it's short.
Reebs. That's what we used to call them when we was kids. It's beer spelled backwards.
Is it just me, or did this trip go downhill since we ran out of Lucky lager.
Where I come from the meal is the result of reflection and study. Menus are prepared in advance, timed to perfection. It is said that without the culinary arts, the crudeness of reality would be unbearable.
We have a saying in the McKay house: "You shake and shake the ketchup bottle, none will come, and then a lot'll."
Ah Miss Blaine, you dance like a herd of cattle. You are a rare woman who lights up a room simply by leaving it!
Virgins. I love 'em. No diseases, no loose as a goose *****, no *****. No nothin. Just pure pleasure.
When you're young, not much matters. When you find something that you care about, then that's all you got. When you go to sleep at night you dream of *****. When you wake up it's the same thing. It's there in your face. You can't escape it. Sometimes when you're young the only place to go is inside. That's just it - ******* is what I love. Take that away from me and I really got nothing.
Now get in my way, *****!
Jesus Christ, what happened?
In Paris, it's good to smell like you've been ******* to make them respect you.
Ox! Where is thy yoke?
Sometimes you just need the honesty and security of a *****.
So what are you, Mr. Driscoll, a lion, or a chimpanzee?
She doesn't want the chocolate...
Taxi! Follow that ape!
No! Let him go, it's me he wants!
For God's sake, Denham, leave the native alone.
Don't be alarmed, ladies and gentlemen. Those chains are made of chrome steel.
Don't worry, Preston. I've had a lot of practice at this. I'm real good at ******** the crappers.
Good things never last Mr. Denham.
You don't have to be nervous, Miss Darrow.
That's a funny one. Isn't that funnier?
God **** it, Preston, all you had to do was look her in the eye and lie!
What are you, an idiot? Do you think they ever asked Cecil B. DeMille if he wasted his time on nudie shots? No! They respected the filmmaker! They showed some class! Not that YOU would know what class is, you cheap lowlife!
What are you trying to do, put the whole ship to sleep?
There's only one creature capable of leaving a footprint that size. The Abominable Snowman.
Stop! We've got to go back! They've taken Ann!
Men would pay $200 for me, and here you are turning down a freebie. You could get a perfectly good dishwasher for that.
You shouldn't have said those horrible things about me... you don't know what I am
Pain. Pain is just a state of mind. It's something you learn to live with; I have.
You're acting like a superstitious schoolboy, Peter. What's next, incense and Rosary beads?
I've got a drunk for a wife and a lunatic for a son. I don't need this **** anymore. You're crazy, both of you.
Eventually revenge is carefully arranged.
You couldn't find your **** in a windstorm.
I will liberate those not liberated. I will release those not released. I will relieve those unrelieved. And set living beings in nirvana.
Thus by the virtue that has collected through all that I have done may the pain of every living creature be completely cleared away.
I see a safe journey, I see a safe return.
They have taken away our silence.
I just ate, so I'm still digesting, so my kung fu may not be as good as later on.
Well done, students... *if* you were trying to disappoint me.
Legend tells of a legendary warrior whose kung fu skills were the stuff of legend.
Wow! I've only seen paintings of that painting!
One often meets his destiny on the road he takes to avoid it.
There is now a level zero.
We are noodle folk. Broth runs through our veins.
I'm not hungry... Master.
This'll be easier than I thought.
The Scroll has given him power... NOOO!
Careful, that soup is... sharp!
The Furious Five! You look a lot bigger than your action figures! Except you, Mantis. You're about the same.
He was so deadly, in fact, that his enemies would go blind from over-exposure to pure awesomeness!
He's too fast... Sorry, Po!
Hey, what you got? You got nothing because I got it right here. You picking on my friends? Get ready to feel the thunder. Come out with the crazy feet. What you goin' to do about the crazy feet. I'm a blur! I'm a blur! You never seen *Bear* style!
I know you're trying to be all mystical and Kung Fu-ey, but could you tell me where we're going?
There is no charge for awesomeness... or attractiveness.
The Sword of Heroes! Said to be so sharp you can get cut just by looking at - Ow!
Giulia is like Oscar Wilde. Give her all the luxuries and she will manage without the little necessities.
The word "torture" doesn't appear in our orders. We've always spoken of interrogation as the only valid method in a police operation directed against unknown enemies. As for the NLF, they request that their members, in the event of capture, should maintain silence for twenty-four hours, and then they may talk. So, the organization has already had the time it needs to render any information useless. What type of interrogation should we choose, the one the courts use for a murder case, that drags on for months?
To know them means to eliminate them. Consequently, the military aspect is secondary to the police method.
I'm a civilian, not a trout - you have no authority over me whatsoever.
You know, sheriff, when friends or family say certain things, they tend not to register. So it helps to hear it from a complete stranger... you're fat.
We, uh, trapped him with our chopper.
I will NOT calm down! This is the second time I've been hit with a severed head and I DON'T LIKE IT!
We do not negotiate with terrorists!
******* Spic *******!
In a world where the dead are returning to life, the word "trouble" loses much of its meaning.
What happened, Riley, did you get ******?
You're dead. You really are *dead*!
I don't usually need that many.
I think I'm more comfortable with being disappointed. I think I'm angry at you for trying to take that away.
I'm gonna pull the whole thing down. I'm gonna bring the whole ******' diseased, corrupt temple down on your head. It's gonna be biblical.
Like I said Clyde, it's a decision you'll have to live with for the rest of your life. Which I figure right now is about 25 more seconds.
It's not what you know. It's what you can prove in court.
A thousand commanders, and we get the Belgian from Alcoholics Anonymous!
Two DOLLARS? You didn't even need to catch the fish! It died of CANCER!
Ah, I was 17! I was so in love with her, I tried to die for her. Two years later I can't even remember her name. Time, erases everything.
...So, between Mamma, Roberto and Alfredo, we yell and scream at each other all day long. Except for Angelica, she just cries. And then finally, we all end up kissing. Can you explain that to me? Because *that's* what love is all about. It's a pain in the ***, but it keeps us together.
You're sick... that's all I have in cash. Now please, don't drink it in here.
See how hard you make me, angel?
That's nice talk, Ben - keep drinking. Between the 101-proof breath and the occasional bits of drool, some interesting words come out.
You go back to your hotel and I'll go back to my glamorous life of being alone. The only thing I have to come home to is a bottle of mouthwash to get the taste of *** out of my mouth. I'm tired of being alone. That's what I'm tired of.
I'll tell you, right now... I'm in love with you. But, be that as it may, i am not here to force my twisted soul into your life.
Do you think she woke up one morning and said: I think I'll go to law school today.
And last week I saw Cameron Diaz at Fred Segal, and I talked her out of buying this truly heinous angora sweater. Whoever said orange was the new pink was seriously disturbed.
So what's this Vivian got that you don't have? Three ****?
If I want to be a Senator, I need to marry a Jackie, not a Marilyn.
So what's a girl to do? He's a guy who followed his ****** to greener pastures. I'm a middle aged, high school drop out with stretch marks and a fat ***.
If you're going to let one stupid prick ruin your life... you're not the girl I thought you were.
There's nothing I love better than a dumb blonde with Daddy's plastic.
Oh, my God, the bend and snap works every time!
I just don't think that Brooke could've done this. Exercise gives you endorphins. Endorphins make you happy. Happy people just don't shoot their husbands, they just don't.
The rules of hair care are simple and finite. Any Cosmo girl would have known.
Because I'm not a Vanderbilt, suddenly I'm white trash? I grew up in Bel Air, Warner. Across the street from Aaron Spelling. I think most people would agree that's a lot better than some stinky old Vanderbilt.
Uh. I'm sorry. I just hallucinated.
I feel comfortable using legal jargon in everyday life.  I object.
Isn't it the first cardinal rule of perm maintenance that you are forbidded to wet your hair for at least 24 hours after getting a perm at the risk of deactivating the ammonium thioglycolate?
Love you say? Well love is another matter.
I require the solace of the shadows and the dark of the night. Sunshine is my destroyer.
Neither country proverb nor King's command could keep me from the woods, today.
What care I for human hearts? Soft and spiritless as porridge! A faerie's heart beats fierce and free!
Mortal world turned to ice... Here be goblin paradise!
Don't be afraid. I just want to play with the baby.
When I was a little girl, my mother would remind me each night before bed, to open up my heart to God, for He was kind, merciful, and just. Things changed when my father left a few years later, leaving her to raise me and my brothers in a place on the edge of the Mojave Desert. She never talked of a kind and merciful God again. Instead she spoke of a prophecy. Of a time when all the world would be covered in darkness and the fate of mankind would be decided. One night, I finally got the courage to ask my mother why God had changed, why He was so mad at His children. "I don't know," she said, tucking the covers around me, "I guess He just got tired of all the ********."
When I was a kid, my father would sit by my bed every night before I went to sleep. And he's say to me, "Percy, if you don't wake up tomorrow, if it turns out that today is your last day on earth. Will you be proud of what you've done in this life? Because if you ain't, you better start getting square."
I wish, for just one day, Dad couldn't tell a lie.
The pen is blue, the pen is blue, the goddamn pen is blue!
Am I too late? Have you been sexually molested yet because I can circle the block.
Looks like Jonesy got his walking papers.
We got thirty-six cases of booze. That's better than money.
I don't believe in this "before Abe" ****.
Yo' hand is nice and supple, like a lady!
You just committed suicide, boy.
I appreciate you going through all the trouble over my cornbread; you don't get a lot of compliments around here.
You know the great thing, though, is that change can be so constant you don't even feel the difference until there is one. It can be so slow that you don't even notice that your life is better or worse, until it is. Or it can just blow you away, make you something different in an instant. It happened to me.
Hindsight. It's like foresight without a future.
I'm not even listening.
Thank you for talking about me behind my back - that'll be useful in court.
What kind of mother can't stand her own son?
It's not my back that's killing me.
Why can't you all just die and leave me alone?
Build this house with me.
Sam! We're almost done.
Do I still Love you? Absolutely. There is not a doubt in my mind. Through all my mind, my ego... I was always faithful in my Love for you. That I made you doubt it, that is the great mistake of a Life full of mistakes. The truth doesn't set us free, Robin. I can tell you I Love you as many times as you can stand to hear it and all that does, the only thing, is remind us... that Love is not enough. Not even close.
Oh angels don't get older sweety. I called him sweety!
Grandpa Lucifer always said it was better to rule in **** than to serve in Heaven. Well, I'm tired of serving in ****.
Remember, you have to shove a pineapple up Hitler's *** at 4 p.m...
Super devil juice? Gimme that, little girl!
Even in **** I get no respect.
The last time I saw a pair of jugs that big, two hillbillies were blowing on them.
I'm from the South. The Deep South.
That guy is still the biggest horndog.
I never been to Earth, Dad! I never even slept over some other dude's house!
Look, it's okay for me to **** in the street, but *you* gotta use a toilet.
I don't know what that guys problem is, it's freezing up here!
The last time you said everything was alright, the Renaissance happened.
Why do you taunt me with your darkness? Your evil is stinkin' up our streets! The end is near! We are all gonna die!
Get this **** outta here!
Now that hurt the both of us.
I hear a train a-comin'!
Great! I freak in your dream, I freak out in my dream, no wonder I'm so ******* exhausted.
Bob, what the **** is with that smoke, man? Whaddya got in there, a couple of hamsters blowing smoke rings, ferchrissakes?
This is ******. No money. No weed. Its all been replaced by a pile of corpses.
I don't know. What I do know is there's no more Harry. Which means there's no more debt. And if there's no more debt, there's no more problem. And there's no problem with the neighbors... because they're all dead. And I think, if I get this right, we haven't done anything wrong... we're in the clear.
You're not funny, Tom. You're fat, and look as though you should be, but you're not.
OY! Keep your fingers out of my soup!
Everything made sense... until Box.
The naming of cats is a difficult matter, it's not just one of your holiday games. You may think at first I'm mad as a hatter, when I tell you that each cat's got three different names.
You're beautiful. Let's have ***.
Logan... you renewed!
Fish, plankton, sea greens... protein from the sea!
Ben, if you mixed drinks that way you mixed metaphors, you'd be out of a job...
Son, you got a talent for stating the obvious.
Back in the 1960's, a reporter from a national magazine went to the governor of our Lone Star state, and asked, "Governor, what's your idea of what a real Texan ought to be?" And the governor said, "Son, that's easy. Just go down to Rio County and get a look at Sheriff Buddy Deeds."
I remember Charlie Wade come to my father's hardware store once. I was just a little boy. And I'd heard stories about how he shot this'un and how he shot that'un. The man winked at me. I peed my pants. Just winked at me.
This beaner fare doesn't agree with me, but the price sure is right.
Hey, look at all this will ya? Tackle, boat... All just to catch a little ol' fish minding his own business down at the bottom of the lake. Hardly seems worth the effort, does it, Sam?
Here... This big fella was sleeping in a crate at Cisco's junkyard. Right when I was gonna open to see what was in her. Jumped right at my face. Scared me so bad I had to kill him without thinking. Gotta be careful where you go pokin'. Who knows what you'll find.
You oughta put up a banner: "Frontera, Texas: gateway to inexpensive *****."
No telling yet if there's been a crime, but this country's seen a fair amount of disagreements over the years.
All my mother does is work. That's how you get to be Spanish.
If I met you for the first time today, I'd still want to be with you.
You ever watched a man die? If you watch very closely, you can sometimes see the soul escaping. And if you're very quick, you can catch it.
Are you ready for my wisdom?
We be nice to them, if they be nice to us.
It's talking, Merry. The tree is talking.
You could have picked a better spot.
No, my lord - let him go. Enough blood has been spilt on his account.
You must understand, young Hobbit, it takes a long time to say anything in Old Entish. And we never say anything unless it is worth taking a long time to say.
Don't follow the lights.
My home is deep in the forest near the roots of the mountains.
There is no promise you can make that I can trust.
I found it, I did. A way through the marshes. Orcs don't use it. Orcs don't know it. They go round for miles and miles. Come hobbitses, soft and quick as shadows we must be.
They run as if the very whips of their masters were behind them.
The fires of Isengard will spread, and the forests of Tuckborough and Buckland will burn. And all that was once great and good in this world will be gone. There won't *be* a Shire, Pippin.
I know your face, Eowyn.
Maybe he does deserve to die, but now that I see him I do pity him.
But, the fat hobbit. He knows. Eyes always watching.
The time of the Elves is over. Do we leave Middle-earth to its fate? Do we let them stand alone?
There will be no dawn... for men.
Look to my coming on the first light of the fifth day, at dawn look to the east.
Where is the horse and the rider? Where is the horn that was blowing? They have passed like rain on the mountain, like wind in the meadow. The days have gone down in the West behind the hills into shadow. How did it come to this?
You'll find more cheer in a graveyard.
Stop! This creature is bound to me and I to him. He is our guide.
A new power is rising. Its victory is at hand. This night the land will be stained with the blood of Rohan. March to Helm's Deep. Leave none alive. To war!
Look for your friends, but do not trust to hope. It has forsaken these lands.
Mordor... the one place in Middle-Earth we don't want to see any closer... the one place we're trying to get to... is just where we can't get. Let's face it, Mr. Frodo. We're lost!
I will draw you, Saruman, as poison is drawn from a wound.
You're late.  You look terrible.
Sneaky little hobbitses.
But that one counts as mine!
The rock and pool, is nice and cool, so juicy sweet. Our only wish,  to catch a fish,  so juicy sweet.
I think we might have made a mistake leaving the Shire, Pippin.
Keep breathing. That's the key. Breathe.
We swears to serve the master of the precious. We will swear on... on... the precious!
Don't talk to it, Merry. Don't encourage it.
The Ring will not save Gondor. It only has the power to destroy. Please, let me go.
You want to know what happened to Boromir? Do you want to know why your brother died? He tried to take the Ring from Frodo, after swearing an oath to protect him! He tried to kill him! The Ring drove your brother mad.
Rohan, my lord, is ready to fall.
Your leechcraft would have had me crawling on all fours like a beast!
Why do you lay these troubles on an already troubled mind?
Be silent. Keep your forked tongue behind your teeth. I did not pass through fire and death to bandy crooked words with a witless worm.
So this is the answer to all the riddles: here in the wild I have you, two halflings and a host of men at my call, and the Ring of Power within my grasp.
His staff. I told you to take the Wizard's staff.
Looks like meat's back on the menu, boys.
I'm wasted on cross-country! We Dwarves are natural sprinters, very dangerous over short distances.
Hasufel! Arod! May these horses bear you to better fortune than their former masters.
A red sun rises, blood has been spilled this night.
Look at my men. Their courage hangs by a thread. If this is to be our end, then I would have them make such an end, as to be worthy of remembrance.
Bring your pretty face to my axe.
I don't care if it's legal! It's wrong.
You underestimate yourself Aleksei. You're the best. You're the **** Aleksei, you're the ****! You're the ****! You're the ****!
You can fight a lot of enemies and survive, but not your biology.
The first and most important rule of gun-running is: Never get shot with your own merchandise.
Every faction in Africa calls themselves by these noble names - Liberation this, Patriotic that, Democratic Republic of something-or-other... I guess they can't own up to what they usually are: the Federation of Worse Oppressors Than the Last Bunch of Oppressors. Often, the most barbaric atrocities occur when both combatants proclaim themselves Freedom Fighters.
Some of the most successful relationships are based on lies and deceit. Since that's where they usually end up anyway, it's a logical place to start.
Of all the weapons in the vast soviet arsenal, nothing was more profitable than Avtomat Kalashnikova model of 1947. More commonly known as the AK-47, or Kalashnikov. It's the world's most popular assault rifle. A weapon all fighters love. An elegantly simple 9 pound amalgamation of forged steel and plywood. It doesn't break, jam, or overheat. It'll shoot whether it's covered in mud or filled with sand. It's so easy, even a child can use it; and they do. The Soviets put the gun on a coin. Mozambique put it on their flag. Since the end of the Cold War, the Kalashnikov has become the Russian people's greatest export. After that comes vodka, caviar, and suicidal novelists. One thing is for sure, no one was lining up to buy their cars.
The problem with gun runners going to war, is that there is no shortage of ammunition.
There are over 550 million firearms in worldwide circulation. That's one firearm for every twelve people on the planet. The only question is: How do we arm the other 11?
In the most AIDS-infested region of the globe - where 1 in 4 is infected - Andy's idea of a joke was to put a young Iman and a young Naomi in my bed - and no condom within a hundred miles.
Sir! Sir, may I interest you in the shoulder fired S-37 surface-to-air missle? It's the old Chinese model. Not so effective against modern military aircraft but deadly if used against a commerical airliner.
Thank God there are still legal ways to exploit developing countries. The only problem with an honest buck is they're so hard to make - the margins are too low, too many people are doin' it.
I would tell you to go to ****, but I think you're already there.
The second rule of gun-running is always ensure you have a foolproof way of getting paid.
We've met before, haven't we?
****** gets more ***** than a toilet seat.
Who the **** owns that dog?
**** Laurent is dead...
Did you want to talk to me? Did you want to ask me "WHY"?
George, didn't you ever want to know what's on the other side of the mountain?
I think I'm going to like it here.
Gentlemen, I give you a toast. Here's my hope that Robert Conway will find his Shangri-La. Here's my hope that we all find our Shangri-La.
Age is a limit we impose upon ourselves. You know, each time you Westerners celebrate your birthday, you build another fence around your minds.
Mr. Chang, if you don't mind, I think I'll go on being amazed - in moderation go course...
Conway, I don't like this place! It's too mysterious!
You know, when we were on that plane, I was fascinated by the way the shadow followed us. That silly shadow! Racing along over mountains and valleys, covering ten times the distance of the plane, and yet always there to greet us... with outstretched arms when we landed. And I've been thinking that, somehow, you're that plane, and I'm that silly shadow. That all my life I've been rushing up and down hills, leaping rivers, crashing over obstacles, never dreaming that one day that beautiful thing in flight would land on this earth and into my arms.
Let's try this again, shall we? You are the puppet, I am the puppeteer. Do try to get it right this time...
Unhand me, you mechanical moron.
I never liked me anyway.
Sarcasm is the recourse of the weak mind.
Ouch. Could he be cuter? I don't *think* so.
Let's see, do I spend my last night on Earth watching Mom and Dad pretend not to be fighting, or blow ten years worth of allowance at the mall? You do the math.
NOT another word. Better. Now if you've finished hosing down the decks with testosterone, I suggest you come with me. I may have found a way to get us off this planet.
8 years of flight training. Navigational holographics online. 50 combat missions. Course confirmed for slingshot exit of the solar system. Just so I could take the family camper on an interstellar picnic.
Eww. They eat their wounded.
OK, last one to kill a bad guy buys the beer.
Mom says to get the **** outta there!
We're lost, aren't we?
No more monkey business!
Never fear, Smith is here.
Nothing good can come of this.
You know, the planet IS breaking up around us.
Something you should abide by on this world or any other, never trust anyone. Especially me.
Am I interrupting something? No really, I think you two should go ahead and slug it out. I mean, here we are on an alien world and you boys want to get into a ******* contest? Please, go for it. I'll have Judy down here in a heartbeat to declare you both unfit, and I'll take over this mission. Now I don't want to hear another word from either of you, is THAT clear?
Major West, I highly recommend you never breed. That, by the way, is my medical opinion.
If this is all a dream, why can't there be more girls?
You're probably just having a mid-life crisis. Did you buy a Porsche yet?
Why do you have to point out how stupid everyone is all the time?
For relaxing times, make it Suntory time.
Let's never come here again because it would never be as much fun.
God will forgive me. The transformation is near.
I've been in love with you since I was eleven, and the **** won't go away.
So that's it? Just forget about you and me?
All's fair in love and basketball.
****, girl, I didn't know Nike made dresses.
It's a trip, you know? When you're a kid, you-you see the life you want, and it never crosses your mind that it's not gonna turn out that way.
How about me coach? Did I always have heart?
You must be the 'Red Dragon'!
You're running around like a Puerto Rican on the fifteenth of the month!
Well, that's one way to deal with people...
In this life, it's not what you hope for, it's not what you deserve - it's what you take!
I know I did a stupid thing. So stupid! Getting braces. I thought... I thought he would love me. Getting... braces! And for what? For something I don't even... I don't know where to put things, you know? I really do have love to give! I just don't know where to put it!
Why are frogs falling from the sky?
...whatever you wanna tell me, whatever you think might scare me, won't... and I will listen... I will be a good listener to you if that's what you want... and you know, you know... I won't judge you... I can do that sometimes, I know, but I won't... I can... listen to you and you shouldn't be scared of scaring me off or anything that you might think I'll think or on and on and just say it and I'll listen to you...
I'll tell you everything, and you tell me everything, and maybe we can get through all the **** and **** and lies that kill other people.
It's dangerous to confuse children with angels.
Donnie, you got struck by lightning last summer you were on vacation in Tahoe, I don't think braces is a good idea.
Dad? You need to be nicer to me.
The book says, "We might be through with the past, but the past ain't through with us."
Let me tell you something, this is not an easy job. I get a call on the radio, dispatch, it's bad news. And it stinks. But this is my job and I love it. Because I want to do well - in this life and in this world, I want to do well. And I want to help people. And I might get twenty bad calls a day. But one time I can help someone and make a save - correct a wrong or right a situation - then I'm a happy cop. And as we move through this life we should try and do good. Do good... And if we can do that, and not hurt anyone else, well... then...
This happens. This is something that happens.
I'll tell you the greatest regret of my life: I let my love go.
Now that I've met you, would you object to never seeing me again?
Let's make some ******' money, folks.
Want to know the common element for the entire group?... I'll tell you the answer: I'll tell you, 'cause I had that one. I had that question... Carbon. Carbon. In pencil lead, it's in the form of graphite and in coal, it's mixed up with other impurities and in the diamond it's in hard form.  "Well... all we were asking was the common element, Donnie... but thank you for all that unnecessary knowledge... haha, kids! Heads so full of useless knowledge. Thank you. Thank you." And the book says: "We may be through with the past... but the past is not through with us!"  And... no, it is not dangerous to confuse children with angels!
A lot of people think this is just a job that you go to. Take a lunch hour... job's over. Something like that. But it's a 24-hour deal. No two ways about it. And what most people don't see... is just how hard it is to do the right thing. People think if I make a judgment call... that's a judgment on them, but that is not what I do. And that's not what should be done. I have to take everything... and play it as it lays. Sometimes people need a little help. Sometimes people need to be forgiven. And sometimes they need to go to jail. And that is a very tricky thing on my part... making that call. I mean, the law is the law. And heck if I'm gonna break it. You can forgive someone. Well, that's the tough part. What can we forgive? Tough part of the job. Tough part of walking down the street.
Forget about the curve ball Ricky, give him the heater.
The American Express Card. Don't steal home without it.
Look at this ******* guy.
Wild Thing. You make my heart sing. You walk everything.
We should've got the live chicken.
Good morning, gentlemen, and welcome to another season of Indians baseball.
I'm ****** off now, Jobu. Look, I go to you. I stick up for you. You don't help me now. I say "**** you," Jobu, I do it myself.
Cerrano's looking for some extra power for tonight. He's looking to sacrifice a live chicken. Man, we can't have people puking in the locker room before the game!
So, an eerie start for the Erie warriors as they drop a heartbreaker to the Yankees, nine to nothing. The pst game show is brought to you by...  Christ I can't find it, the **** with it.
Nice throw, dickhead.
Wild thing, you make my heart sing.
Let's cut through the ****, Vaughn. I only got one thing to say to you: "Strike this mother ****** out."
Is very bad to steal Jobu's rum. Is very bad.
Willie Mays Hayes. I hit like Mays, and I run like Hayes.
You may run like Hayes. but you hit like ****.
All right people, we got 10 minutes 'till game time, let's all gather 'round. I'm not much for giving inspirational addresses, but I'd just like to point out that every newspaper in the country has picked us to finish last. The local press seems to think that we'd save everyone the time and trouble if we just went out and shot ourselves. Me, I'm for wasting sportswriters' time. So I figured we ought to hang around for a while and see if we can give 'em all a nice big shitburger to eat!
That's too much power for one man to have.
I'm half wop, I'm half ******. I'm not afraid of nobody.
We had the best organization a black man's ever had. Niggers ruined it.
I will not touch the white man's poison; his drugs, his liquor, his swine, his women.
A man curses because he doesn't have the words to say what's on his mind.
A Muslim must be strikingly upright; an outstanding example so that those in the darkness can see the power of the light.
Hey Little! Your man out here waiting on you!
STOP IT! You say one more line and I'mma have to smoke myself!
My name is B-rad. Not Robbie van Winkle. I like my lattes non-fat and don't fo-get the sprinkle.
KING KONG... AIN'T GOT NOTHIN'... ON ME! AAAAAGHHHHHH!
**** doesn't anyone know where the **** driveway is!
This ain't no picnic *****!
You that weak **** from the club.
Anne, to love you is treason against France. But not to love you is treason against my heart.
D'Artagnan, you will hunt down Porthos, Athos, and Aramis, and bring me their heads, or I will have yours. And as for you, my brother, back to the prison you will go, and into the mask you hate. Wear it 'til you love it! And die in it.
I'd rather die covered in blood than an old man lying in my own ****.
D'Artagnan, I am not angry with you. I knew you would lead me to them, and so you have. Lay down your sword and I will not punish you. I will let you retire in peace, and I will give your friends a swift execution, if you surrender NOW!
You have the heart of a king.
You are right. It is rotten. I will speak to the King myself. You have my word.
When I discover the identity of this Jesuit rebel, I will kill both him and the man who told me.
I've worn that mask so long I don't feel safe without it.
I'm a genius, not an engineer.
Athos... after all you have done, I must ask you one more service. Let me love you like a son to a father. And I pray you live for this: to love me like your son.
Put this man away where no one will hear his insanity. Let him be fed by a deaf-mute but feed him well.
You grow fond of him. That is good.
There is no such thing as tough. There is trained and untrained. Now which are you?
The gunshot holds no fear!
I think he's been sick. He's all right now, but I think he's been very, very sick.
I'm gonna take your family apart piece by piece, you understand me? Piece by piece.
The most important thing in life, is family.
I'm goin' home, too. I'm goin' to Blue Bayou.
I am going to ask questions. If you don't answer fully and truthfully, you will suffer much more than you have to. I'm going to cut your fingers off. One by one, if I have to.
Dear God, I do not ask for health or wealth. People ask you so often that you can't have any left. Give me, God, what else you have. Give me what no-one else asks for. Amen.
He'll deliver more justice in a weekend than ten years of your courts and tribunals.
You're insane, but you might also be brilliant.
Kaufman, did you come here to wrestle or act like an ***?
I am from Caspiar, an Island in the Caspian Sea. It sunk.
Andy, you have to look inside and ask this question: who are you trying to entertain - the audience or yourself?
I look upon a woman as a whole.
Here I am, sitting in the center of a lot of wealth, the escalation in crime couldn't be better, and I'm not turning a **** nickel on it!
I've got something on my ***-dar!
It's just you and me now, sport. And I'm going to find you, God **** it.
You're so sly... but so am I.
Not only do I look like Meirschultz, I am Meirschultz!
A rat eating a cat? Why, that is news! By the way, did you hear a shot last night?
Tonight, my dear Maxwell, I'm ready to try my experiment on a human!
Once a ham, always a ham!
I must get her outta here. She must have oxygen!
I left a piece of skin in a movie theater once so it could watch movies all its life.
I have this theory. I think, historically, women have been held back in so many ways that when they get power like they do behind the wheel, they can't help but abuse it. It's akin to Hannah Arendt's Eichmann theory about prison guards and prisoners switching roles.
My ******* is longer than my *****.
Make sure you can handle rejection. I can't.
Tell your dog not to worry, sooner or later we all lose our balls.
Ma, sooner or later, there comes a point in a man's life when he's gotta face some facts. And one fact I gotta face is that, whatever it is that women like, I ain't got it.
You don't like her. My mother don't like her. She's a dog. And I'm a fat, ugly man. Well, all I know is I had a good time last night. I'm gonna have a good time tonight. If we have enough good times together, I'm gonna get down on my knees. I'm gonna beg that girl to marry me. If we make a party on New Year's, I got a date for that party. You don't like her? That's too bad.
Someone get that dirty old man out of this operating theater.
Oh, Frank, my lips are hot. Kiss my hot lips.
Now, fair's fair Henry. If I nail Hotlips and hit Hawkeye can I go home too?
The angels are not done with you yet!
Remember when you were a kid and you'd hold your breath when you run past a grave yard? Leave that man alone.
It's okay. The angels burn within them now.
Take Payne alive. If there is anything left.
So tell me Joe... How come a man as attractive, intelligent, well-spoken... diffident in the most seductive way, and yet... powerful... is all alone in this world?
Don't blow smoke up my ***, it will ruin my autopsy.
Careful Bill, you'll give yourself a heart attack and ruin my vacation.
When I introduce you, and I tell them who you are, I don't think anyone will stay for dinner.
I can't believe you people. I come for you, and you want to stay, I let you stay and you want to go.
I want you to sing with rapture and dance like a dervish.
You got enough nice pictures?
You never know, lightning could strike.
I don't think this is the lightning you're looking for.
It nice it happen to you. Like you come to the island and had a holiday. Sun didn't burn you red-red, just brown. You sleep and no mosquito eat you. But the truth is, it bound to happen if you stay long enough. So take that nice picture you got in your head home with you, but don't be fooled. We lonely here mostly too. If we lucky, maybe, we got some nice pictures to take with us.
You're not Death. You're just a kid in a suit.
I loved Susan from the moment she was born, and I love her now and every minute in between. And what I dream of is a man who will discover her, and that she will discover a man who will love her, who is worthy of her, who is of this world, this time and has the grace, compassion, and fortitude to walk beside her as she makes her way through this beautiful thing called life.
Thank you for loving me.
I wish... you could have known my father.
Love is passion, obsession, someone you can't live without. I say, fall head over heels. Find someone you can love like crazy and who will love you the same way back. How do you find him? Well, you forget your head, and you listen to your heart. And I'm not hearing any heart. Cause the truth is, honey, there's no sense living your life without this. To make the journey and not fall deeply in love, well, you haven't lived a life at all. But you have to try, cause if you haven't tried, you haven't lived.
Tear down fences... why, if you tore one picket off your neighbor's fence, he'd sue you!
O.K. folks, but remember your manners. No stampeding. Walk slow, like you do when you come to pay your taxes.
$5,000. Holy mackerel! I can see the helots coming now. A whole army of them.
There you are, Norton - - the people, try and lick that.
Why can't that spirit, that warm Christmas spirit, last all year long?
Listen, if that guy lays an egg I want to get *something* out of it! I'm getting a Jane Doe ready.
If it was raining hundred dollar bills, you'd be out looking for a dime you lost someplace!
I don't read no papers, and I don't listen to radios either. I know the world's been shaved by a drunken barber, and I don't have to read it.
I've seen guys like you before. Guys that never had to worry. Then they get a hold of some dough and go goofy.
Finished playing with yourself there, Lenny?
Hmmm. I don't feel drunk.
You know what? I think I'm gonna use you. I'm telling you now because I'll enjoy it so much more if I know that you could stop me if you weren't such a ******* freak!
That's a test? Where were you guys when I did my CPA?
You know, I've had more rewarding friendships than this one. Although I do get to keep telling the same jokes.
Probably burned truck loads of your stuff before. Can't remember to forget you.
You're not a killer.  That's why you're so good at it.
I have to believe in a world outside my own mind. I have to believe that my actions still have meaning, even if I can't remember them. I have to believe that when my eyes are closed, the world's still there. Do I believe the world's still there? Is it still out there?... Yeah. We all need mirrors to remind ourselves who we are. I'm no different.
Beg my wife's forgiveness, before I blow  your brains out.
Did anything about that seem unusual to you?
Unlimited technology from the whole universe, and we cruise 'round in a Ford P.O.S.
HEY, OLD GUYS! Do those still work?
You idiots! You don't get it - I've won! It's over! You're milksuckers! You don't matter! In fact, in just a few seconds you won't even BE matter!
This caused the 1977 New York blackout. A practical joke by the great attractor. He thought it was funny as ****.
Gentlemen, congratulations. You're everything we've come to expect from years of government training. Now please step this way, as we provide you with our final test: an eye exam...
Interesting job you boys have...
Get your big butt back in the house!
Months, days, hours. Always face it forward.
We'll take it from here.
My eyes still hurt from reading that movie.
It just ain't right cheatin' from a pregnant lady.
You fell. Hey fella, you fell.
Uh, well, sir, I ain't a f'real cowboy. But I am one helluva stud!
You want the word on that brother-and-sister act, Hansel's a *** and Gretel's got the hots for herself, so who cares, right? Load up on the salami.
I only get carsick on boats.
Oh, Joe it's... it's so difficult, I - You're a nice person, Joe, I- I- I should never have asked you up here, you're... You're a lovely person, really. Oh, God, I loathe life, I loathe it! Please go, please.
He was even dumber than you. He couldn't even write his whole name. "X," that's what it ought to say on that goddamn headstone, one big lousy "X."
The two basic items necessary to sustain life, are sunshine and coconut milk... didya know that?
Dear Susan: Poor Jimmy was caught and beaten so badly he got a severe hernia, and lost a ********. He's been in the sanitarium for months. In comparison, my problems seem very small.
For a nation of pigs, it sures is funny you don't eat'em! Jesus Christ forgave the ********, but I can't! I hate! I hate you! I hate your nation! And I hate your people! And I **** your sons and daughters because they're pigs! You're a pig! You're all pigs.
Zordon! We need Dinozord Power, NOW!
Yum, yum! Power Rangers - delicious!
Polly wanna MegaZord?
From this moment forth the world as you know it shall cease to exist. Welcome to my nightmare!
What is that odious stench? Smells like teenagers.
Taking over the world is one thing. Finding good help to run it is another.
Hi, Honey... I'm home!
The Power has been destroyed. It is gone. The Zords... the weapons... all of it. The Power Rangers are no more.
Hey, pretty fancy Spansy, I guess if You invest Your Money well in 60 Centuries... You can manage to buy yourself something Nice.
You're going to meet the most extraordinary men, the *******, brightest, funniest men, and you're going to fall in love with so many of them, and you won't know until the end of your life who your greatest friends were or your greatest love was.
As President of the Board of Supervisors it's my duty to make this announcement: both Mayor Moscone and Supervisor Harvey Milk have been shot and killed.
I am here tonight to say that we will no longer sit quietly in the closet. We must fight. And not only in the Castro, not only in San Francisco, but everywhere the Anitas go. Anita Bryant did not win tonight, Anita Bryant brought us together! She is going to create a national *** force! And the young people in Jackson Mississippi, in Minnesota, in the Richmond, in Woodmere New York, who are hearing her on television, hearing Anita Bryant telling them on television that they are sick, they are wrong, there is no place in this great country for them, no place in this world, they are looking to us for something tonight, and I say, we have got to give them hope!
The new Mrs. Milk. I give it a week.
Tonight the laws of God, and the cultural values of man have been vindicated. The people of Dade County, the Normal majority, have said 'Enough, enough, enough.'
A *** candidate against another *** candidate. That's unfortunate.
How do you teach homosexuality? Is it like French?
Out of the bar and into the streets! Anita Bryant is coming for you!
I ask this... If there should be an assassination, I would hope that five, ten, one hundred, a thousand would rise. I would like to see every *** lawyer, every *** architect come out - - If a bullet should enter my brain, let that bullet destroy every closet door... And that's all. I ask for the movement to continue. Because it's not about personal gain, not about ego, not about power... it's about the "us's" out there. Not only ****, but the Blacks, the Asians, the disabled, the seniors, the us's. Without hope, the us's give up - I know you cannot live on hope alone, but without it, life is not worth living. So you, and you, and you... You gotta give em' hope... you gotta give em' hope.
I know you're angry! I'm angry!
My name is Harvey Milk and I'm here to recruit you!
Gentlemen, Anne Kronenberg - a woman. A woman who likes women, isn't that ususual?
You replaced Scott with a *******?
You better tell me, what the **** is going on around here?
Follow your heart and don't question it, no matter where it tells you to go... It will open up a world of experiences you can't even imagine.
The Precogs are never wrong. But, occasionally... they do disagree.
Thank god you didn't show up any later. This place gives me the creeps at night.
No, he's not here. I don't know where he is, he never tells me anything any more. Probably out having an affair somewhere.  Oh here he is.  It's Jim Taylor, he wants to know who you're having an affair with.
Wake up, Claire! Jim's dead! He's dead! They're all dead!
There was never any physical evidence I had anything to do with that... that... that exceptional piece of work.
I want him manning a radar tower in Alaska by the end of the day. Just mail him his clothes.
Relax Luther, it's much worse than you think.
Hey, I'm the flavor of the month.
Can I ask you something, Kittridge? If you're dealing with a man who has crushed, shot, stabbed, and detonated five members of his own IMF team, how devastated do you think you're gonna make him by hauling Mom and Uncle Donald down to the county courthouse?
As always, should you or any of your IM force be caught or killed, the Secretary will disavow any knowledge of your actions. Good luck, Jim. This tape will self-destruct in five seconds.
If we're going to Virginia why don't we drop by Fort Knox? I could fly a helicopter through the lobby and set it down right inside the vault. And it would be a **** of a lot easier than breaking into the goddamn CIA.
Try any sleight of hand with my money and I'll cut your throat.
You know, that was the hardest part about having to portray you, grinning like an idiot every fifteen minutes.
You know women, mate. Like monkeys, they are - won't let go of one branch until they've got hold of the next.
Clear the bridge for me.
The satellite doesn't work as fast as I do.
You're not gonna shoot me Sean, not this *****, cuz she's worth thirty seven, million pounds.
Feel like pleading for your life?
If you look at Hunt's operational history, and I have, you'll notice that he invariably favors misdirection over confrontation.
We've got 19 hours and 57 minutes. I'll get Bellerophon into your system by then. Just stay alive. I'm not going to lose you.
Go ahead, Hunt. Use it. It's not a bad way to go. A lot better than the way that ***** is going to die.
In just a few hours you can be assured of going down in history as the typhoid Mary of "Aus". G'day.
They're us. We're them.
When we get back, we have GOT to try this in the simulator...
Internal combustion, boys. Accept no substitutes.
I left my number in your undies!
Excuse me kitty. I'll be right back after I choke my monkey!
Well, now, uh, Launcelot, Galahad, and I, wait until nightfall, and then leap out of the rabbit, taking the French by surprise - not only by surprise, but totally unarmed!
You don't frighten us, English pig dogs. Go and boil your bottoms, you sons of a silly person. I blow my nose at you, so-called "Arthur King," you and all your silly English K-nig-hts.
I don't want to talk to you no more, you empty headed animal food trough wiper. I **** in your general direction. Your mother was a hamster and your father smelt of elderberries.
On second thought, let's not go to Camelot. It is a silly place.
Are you suggesting coconuts migrate?
When I first came here, this was all swamp. Everyone said I was daft to build a castle on a swamp, but I built in all the same, just to show them. It sank into the swamp. So I built a second one. That sank into the swamp. So I built a third. That burned down, fell over, then sank into the swamp. But the fourth one stayed up. And that's what you're going to get, Lad, the strongest castle in all of England.
Dennis! There's some lovely filth down here!
Oh, but you can't expect to wield supreme executive power just because some watery tart threw a sword at you.
Message for you, sir.
What a strange person.
Oh but if I went 'round sayin' I was Emperor, just because some moistened bint lobbed a scimitar at me, they'd put me away.
We are the Knights who say... NI.
I hope life on Earth is everything you remember it to be.
Sam, get some sleep. You're very tired.
Gerty, is there someone else in the room?
You've been up here too long man. You've lost your marbles.
Sam, I can only account for what occurs on this base.
Everything seems like nothing to me now, 'cause I want you in my bed. I don't care if I burn in ****. I don't care if you burn in ****. The past and the future is a joke to me now. I see that they're nothing. I see they ain't here. The only thing that's here is you - and me.
You have such a head for knowing!
Old man, you give those dogs another piece of my food and I'm gonna kick you 'til you're dead!
I can't sleep any more. It's too much like death.
Now he's going to play that **** Vicki Carr record, and when he comes to bed he won't touch me.
I ain't no freakin' monument to justice! I lost my hand! I lost my bride! Johnny has his hand! Johnny has his bride! You want me to take my heartache, put it away and forget?
Aw, Johnny, 40 years old and she's still runnin' your life!
Someone, tell a joke...
Pardon me folks. That was just a very attractive mental patient.
I looked the wrong way and I lost my hand. He could make you look the wrong way and you could lose your whole head!
This is the most tormented man I have ever known. I'm in love with this man, but he doesn't know that, 'cause I never told him, 'cause he could never love anybody since he lost his hand and his girl.
Loretta, I love you. Not like they told you love is, and I didn't know this either, but love don't make things nice - it ruins everything. It breaks your heart. It makes things a mess. We aren't here to make things perfect. The snowflakes are perfect. The stars are perfect. Not us. Not us! We are here to ruin ourselves and to break our hearts and love the wrong people and *die*. The storybooks are **********. Now I want you to come upstairs with me and *get* in my bed!
The next time you're going to do anything or say anything or buy anything, think it over very carefully. When you're sure you're right, forget the whole thing.
If you ain't eatin' Wham, you ain't eatin' ham.
This little piggy went to market. A meek and as mild as a lamb. He smiled in his tracks. When they slipped him the axe. He KNEW he'd turn out to be Wham!
I kind of felt that he kind of felt that if I kind of told you that you'd know that he knew that you knew... or something.
You've been taken to the cleaners, and you don't even know your pants are off.
So you hit a spring, a bubbling spring... right here, in our cellar.
Miss Stellwagon says advertising makes people who can't afford it, buy things they don't want, with money they haven't got.
Don't worry. If I were here to kill you, you would already be dead. After you left today, I realized that our friendship was a little one-sided. So tomorrow night when we meet, if you'd be so kind as to bring all the pictures and the memory card from your camera. That way we could like each other simply for who we are. If you don't show up, I will presume that you've gone to the police, and I will kill you. Even if I go to jail because of you, Mr. Smith, someone will find you, wherever you are, and they will kill you.
Even if that guy was charming and funny, I still wouldn't like him.
Don't kid yourself, Earl. You're going to kill again.
I thought the dinner was fantastic but I was not too fond of the dessert. Would you like to stop and get something sweet?
For all the taxes we pay, you'd think they'd make it more difficult to hack into the police personnel file.
You always want to invest in things people can't do without. Water and cemeteries... pretty safe bets.
Before I was the Thumbprint Killer, Mr. Smith, I killed a lot of people in a lot of different ways.
Jesse, you know what would make me feel really safe right now? If you got hit by a truck and died!
I don't enjoy killing, Mr. Smith. I do it because I'm addicted to it.
Even his hands are oily.
"At two o'clock this morning, Mr. Deeds held up traffic while he fed a bagful of doughnuts to a horse. When asked why he was doing it, he replied, 'I just wanted to see how many doughnuts this horse would eat before he asked for a cup of coffee.'"
Welcome to Mandrake Falls Where the scenery enthralls Where no hardship e'er befalls Welcome to Mandrake Falls.
That guy is either the dumbest, stupidest, most imbecilic idiot in the world, or else he's the grandest thing alive. I can't make him out.
You tell *Her Majesty* that if her husband were here he'd tell her to get out of the house and get some air into her lungs.
No one should think themselves wiser than me!
How dare the Irish break with the Anglicans? If Albert were alive today he would never allow the Crown to give up Church patronage. No, the Irish must be told, very firmly, to stay exactly where they are. It is the thin edge of the wedge, Mr Disraeli. Next, you will be telling me that the Crown no longer governs this nation.
Yesterday, Gladstone talked for three hours on the Irish Church Bill... I am as guilty as the rest of underestimating his reforming zeal. Tory days may be numbered, but I fancy there yet remains one last hope of deliverance. Wheresoever the blame lies, we must now close ranks and defend Mrs Brown's England. As for my interminable journey to the land of Calvin, oatcakes and sulphur...  no Prime Minister made greater sacrifice than attempting to run the country six hundred miles north of civilization.
I am not now, nor have I ever been, a psychologist.
She kept yammering all the time, but her hips were doing all the talking.
This shrink school you went to, did you hear about it in an infomercial?
Have you come across a bigger shithead than my stepfather?
I may be young, but Doc, I can tell you that I'm very immature.
You actually address yourself by name in your thoughts?
Oh, she doesn't know about it yet. Right now, out of the two of us, I'm the only one in love. But I'm really stoked!
You know what this feels like? - When I was in high school the thing I wanted most when I was stuck in class, the thing that I was desperately in pursuit of, was a hall pass. That's all I ever wanted. I loved moving freely around the school while everybody else was trapped in there. That's how I feel right now. Like I have some giant - all day - hall pass.
Are you positive your mother's a *****?
I watched 20/20, it was shocking! Did you know the government is wasteful?
I wish I could live in the shower.
This beautiful concert that you've just heard could be the very last concert for the East Harlem Violin Program. The board of education and the district attorney think that music isn't important. But they are wrong! And they're gonna get a *big* fight!
He's got you on a pedestal and me in his arms.
Tell him you love him. Bite the bullet.
This is my one chance at happiness. I have to be ruthless!
My fears and secrets: I'm afraid I killed my mother.
Weeping willow with your tears running down, why do you always weep and frown? Is it because he left you one day? is it because he could not stay? On your branches he would swing, do you long for the happiness that day would bring? He found shelter in your shade. You thought his laughter would never fade. Weeping willow, stop your tears. There is something to calm you fears. You think death has ripped you forever apart. But I know he'll always be in your heart.
'Ode to Ice Cream' by Vada Sultenfuss. I like ice cream a whole lot/It tastes good on days that are hot/On a cone or in a dish/This will be my only wish/Vanilla, chocolate, rocky road/Even with pie, a la mode.
I used to like to play with my Ken and Barbie dolls. Ken was my favorite. Then one Christmas I got them a camper and all they wanted to do was hang out in it by themselves. So I wasn't too upset when they took that wrong turn and went over the cliff.
Mrs. Sennett, don't worry Tomas J will be all right. My mother will take care of him.
Where are his glasses? He can't see without his glasses!
Vada, if ******** wore a bra, you'd be top heavy.
I remember before I was born, wounded up like a fur ball in the highly overrated fetal position, luckily I'm not claustrophobic, but on rainy days I still felt a tightness in my left shoulder. So now that my stepmother's pregnant, I understand what the baby's going through, and I'm not jealous at all, really, not at all.
Life's full of barbaric customs. But I hope they all end with a kiss like that.
UCLA. My Cardigan-Sweater period.
Who are you? Hitler's hall monitor?
Why is it boys talk so much, when they have nothing to say? And girls have plenty to say, but no one will listen?
Your Dad's a paranoid nitwit who has never let his baby girl out of his sight for the simple reason that he's a paranoid nitwit.
May the forks be with us.
I'm gonna make you eat dirt you soap bubble , I'm gonna make you beg for somebody to help you let go. You may mean the world to your mother but you're a...  .
OK, brother, then you can go to some nice warm place, and I don't mean California.
I don't know WHAT he was, but he made Frankenstein look like a lily!
Remember the last time you got ******? What I want you to do is close your eyes, and remember the last time Mickey gave you the high hard one. You thinking about it? Good. Well you can forget it, 'cause it's never gonna happen again. Because when they get through with all the electroshock **** they got lined up for that **********, ol' Mickey ain't gonna be worth a ****.
You make every day feel like kindergarten.
You'll never understand, Wayne. You and me, we're not even the same species. I used to be you, then I evolved. From where you're standing, you're a man. From where I'm standing, you're an ape. You're not even an ape. You're a media person. Media's like the weather, only it's man-made weather. Murder? It's pure. You're the one made it impure. You're buying and selling fear. You say "why?" I say "why bother?"
Somebody once said, "To write well, you have to write what you know." Well, here is what I know...
I'm not Josie Grossie anymore!
See ya around the Cell Block, Mrs. Robinson.
Oh my God, like, there goes another lemming!
God wouldn't take me.
Every kid knows who Freddy is. He's like Santa Claus... or King Kong or...
Dylan... until mommy gets back... whatever you do don't fall asleep.
Jack Kelly? Yeah, he was here, but he put an egg in his shoe and beat it.
It's this brain of mine, it's always makin' mistakes... it's got a mind of its own.
So what are we supposed to do to the bums, kiss em?
This'll bust me, I'm barely makin' a livin' right now!
You shouldn't be callin' people lousy little shrimps, Oscar, unless you're referrin' to the family resemblance in your brother here.
Deah me, what is dat unpleasant aroma? I fear da sewer may have backed up durin' da night.
And so's your old lady! You tell Mr. Pulitzer he's gotta have an appointment with me!
if you will SHUT UP now, and do EXACTLY what I tell you to do, I'll keep you alive.
Hey, young man! You got knocked the **** out!
Negro, what the **** you doing to my woman?
Oh man, I hate rollerbladers. Skateboarders I don't mind, even though they dress like ******' idiots. But when I see some pinhead on rollerblades, it really gives me the urge to grease the front of my car with 'em.
Miss Winston, EVERYBODY has a secret face!
Quite a dance huh? Death everywhere and you and me in the middle!
Lie still... it's quicker this way
Never touched a legend before!
Its going to take more than a knitting needle to **** me up boy!
Weakness compels strength, betrayer begets blood; this is the Law of the Nine Clans.
I've investigated World Bank organizations, drug cartels, arms dealers, I've never faced this kind of thing! For Ninjas its ******* unbelievable!
The irizumi does not hide the skin. The tattoo reveals the nature of the man and illuminates the four noble professions in the Book Of Five Rings: the warrior, the artist, the merchant, and the farmer. If there is a conflict between the needle and the skin, between the mark and the man, then perhaps the path you have chosen is not the path for which you're suited.
What did you just say, Old Man? I know you didn't just disrespect me, did you? Are you that ******* stupid? You disrespect me, I'll tattoo the ceiling with your ******* brains!
To an unseen caller: "Hello! Comrade Kasabian? No, I am sorry. He hasn't been with us for six months. He was called back to Russia and was investigated. You can get further details from his widow."
The day will come when you will be free. Go to bed, Little Father, we want to be alone.
Ninotchka, it's midnight. One half of Paris is making love to the other half.
Don't make an issue of my womanhood.
The last mass trials were a great success. There are going to be fewer but better Russians.
I'm so happy, I'm so happy! Nobody can be so happy without being punished.
A Russian! I love Russians! Comrade, I've been fascinated by your five-year plan for the last fifteen years.
Oh, that Burganoff. You never know if he's on his way to the washroom or the secret police.
A radio's a little box that you buy on the installment plan, and before you tune it in, they tell you there's a new model out.
I want to tell you something which I thought I would never say, which I thought nobody should ever say because I thought it didn't exist. And Leon, I can't say it.
In Richard Nixon's long history of underhanded dealings he's never had better value for his money. If I were to open my mouth all the dominoes would fall.
I just don't understand it.
There's already been one radical in the White House. I don't believe it could survive another.
This is the sort of thing that Mafia people can do, washing money and so forth. We just don't know about these things because we're not criminals.
It's the President's personal property. I will never give up my tapes to a bunch of Kennedy-loving Harvard Democrat cocksuckers.
Sir, don't you think all these deletion marks in the transcripts make it look as though you do nothing but swear?
Power is the ultimate aphrodisiac.
When they look at you, they see what they want to be. When they look at me, they see what they are.
I never thought Kennedy was ready for the presidency.
John, sooner or later, sooner, I think, you're gonna learn a lesson that's been learned by everyone who's ever gotten close to Richard Nixon. That he's the darkness reaching out for the darkness. And eventually, it's either you or him. Your grave's already been dug, John.
Is peace all you are interested in? The real war is in us. History is a symptom of our disease.
I hope I haven't let you down.
Can you imagine what this man would be like had anyone ever loved him?
Presidents don't threaten. They don't have to.
We created Frankenstein with these **** Cubans.
They can't impeach me for bombing Cambodia. The president can bomb anybody he likes.
Well you live pretty well out here. I understand why you want to keep your budgets classified.
I bet if I was President they wouldn't have killed me.
Your boy's on the way up!
I'm not a quitter, never have been. But I'm not stupid either. A trial would kill me, that's what they want. They won't get it.
Yeah, I'm going to bring you something, alright. I decided to make you a special project of mine. You ain't going have to come looking for me at all.
... Where's the last guy? Ultimo hombre. Last man standing, must've been one.
Would you hold still, please, sir?
I always figured when I got older, God would sorta come inta my life somehow. And he didn't. I don't blame him. If I was him I would have the same opinion of me that he does.
Look at that ******* bone.
But I think once you quit hearing "sir" and "ma'am," the rest is soon to foller.
These are some ripe petunias!
Aw, ***** bells. They even shot the dog!
Here last week they found this couple out in California. They rent out rooms for old people, kill'em, bury'em in the yard, cash their social security checks. Well, they'd tortur'em first, I don't know why. Maybe the television set was broke.
Step out of your car, please.
You know Charlie Walser? Has the place east of Sanderson? Well you know how they used to slaughter beeves, hit 'em with a maul right here to stun 'em... and then up and slit their throats? Well here Charlie has one trussed up and all set to drain him and the beef comes to. It starts thrashing around, six hundred pounds of very ******-off livestock if you'll pardon me... Charlie grabs his gun there to shoot the **** thing in the head but what with the swingin' and twistin' it's a glance-shot and ricochets around and comes back hits Charlie in the shoulder. You go see Charlie, he still can't reach up with his right hand for his hat... Point bein', even in the contest between man and steer the issue is not certain.
Would you like something to eat? Something to nibble? Apricots, soaked in honey? Quite why, no one knows, because it stops them tasting like apricots and makes them taste like honey... and if you wanted honey, you could just... buy honey. Instead of apricots. But nevertheless they're yours if you want them.
I'm sorry I am so late. Bollocksed up at work again, I fear. Millions down the drain.
Well, isn't this a good opportunity to... slip her one?
Bugger this for a bunch of bananas.
Are you a fan of Henry James?
Oh God, this is one of those key moments in life, when it's possible you can be really, genuinely cool - and I'm failing 100%. I absolutely and totally and utterly adore you and I think you're the most beautiful woman in the world and more importantly I genuinely believe and have believed for some time now that we can be best friends. What do YOU think?
If I were to employ a wet rag would I have to pay it as much as I pay you?
Just going to the kitchen to get some food, then I'm going to tell you a story that will make your balls shrink to the size of raisins.
I knew a girl at school called Pandora. Never got to see her box, though.
How did I look?  Not bad, not bad at all. Well chosen briefs I must say. Chicks dig grey.  Nice. Firm. Buttocks.
The more I think about things, the more I see no rhyme or reason in life. no one knows why some things work out and some things don't. Why some of us are lucky and some of us get...
"For June who loved this garden from Joseph who always sat beside her." Some people do spend their whole lives together.
Yes, of course. We'll talk later.
Progress always comes late.
I'm asking for an example of one of these dumb ***** being a dumb ****.
Hey! I'm the law, I ain't gotta do nothing.
This stuff's nuttier than my **** after I've eaten an Almond Roca!
So you're against me now too? Is that how it is boys? The whole world, God almighty, and now you.
****! We're in a tight spot!
Them syreens did this to Pete. They loved him up and turned him into a horny toad.
The color guard is colored!
A woman is the most fiendish instrument of torture ever devised to bedevil the days of man.
So long boys. See you in the funny papers.
Say, any of you boys smithies? Or, if not smithies per se, were you otherwise trained in the metallurgic arts before straitened circumstances forced you into a life of aimless wanderin'?
Hey mister! I don't mean to be tellin' tales out of school, but there's a feller in there that'll pay you ten dollars if you sing into his can.
Talk, you un-Reconstructed whelp of a *****!
I'm gonna visit those foreclosing son-of-a-guns at the Indianola Savings & Loan, slap that money on the barrelhead and buy back the family farm. You ain't no kind of man if you ain't got land.
Moral fibre? I invented moral fibre! Pappy O'Daniel was displaying rectitude and high-mindedness when that egghead you work for was still messing his drawers!
I slaughtered this horse last Tuesday. I think it's startin' to turn.
You don't say much my friend, but when you do it's to the point, and I salute you for it.
Do not seek the treasure!
I'll press your flesh, you dimwitted sumbitch! You don't tell your pappy how to court the electorate. We ain't one-at-a-timin' here. We're MASS communicating!
Friend? Some of your foldin' money's come unstove.
Vernon here's got a job. Vernon's got prospects. He's bona fide. What are you?
Shake a leg Junior! Thank God your mammy died givin' birth. If she'd have seen you, she'd have died o' shame.
And so, we gonna hang us a negro!
Mrs. Hogwallop up and R-U-N-N-O-F-T.
Stairway to heaven. We shall all meet by and by.
where's the happy little tire swing?
These boys is not white! These boys is not white! ****, they ain't even old timey!
I don't want FOP **** it, I'm a Dapper Dan Man!
I'll tell you what I am - I'm the **** paterfamilias! You can't marry him!
Brothers! Oh, brothers! We have all gathered here, to preserve our hallowed culture and heritage! We aim to pull evil up by the root, before it chokes out the flower of our culture and heritage! And our women, let's not forget those ladies, y'all. Looking to us for protection! From darkies, from Jews, from papists, and from all those smart-*** folks say we come descended from monkeys!
You said you wish we could be together.
The moment you set foot on that casino floor, they'll be watching you like hawks. Hawks with video cameras.
Tess is with Benedict now? She's too tall for him!
Well, then inform Mr. Levin that he'll be better off watching the fight in front of his television at home... Surely *he* must have HBO.
You of all people should know Terry, in your hotel, there's always someone watching.
All right, you proved your point. You broke into my vault. Congratulations, you're a dead man.
Did someone call for a doctor?
You guys are pros. The best. I'm sure you can make it out of the casino. Of course, lest we forget, once you're out the front door, you're still in the middle of the ******* desert!
What? Did you guys get a group rate or something?
You're thirty seconds late, I was going to send out a search-
Oh let the sun beat down upon my face, stars to fill my dream. I am a traveler in both time and space, to be where I have been.
I can't believe what a bunch of nerds we are. We're looking up "money laundering" in a dictionary.
Corporate accounts payable, Nina speaking. Just a moment.
Conjugal visits? Mmmm. Not that I know of. Y'know, minimum-security prison is no picnic. I have a client in there right now. He says the trick is: kick someone's *** the first day, or become someone's *****. Then everything will be all right. W-Why do you ask, anyway?
Mr. Lumbergh told me to talk to payroll and then payroll told me to talk to Mr. Lumbergh and I still haven't received my paycheck and he took my stapler and he never brought it back and then they moved my desk to storage room B and there was garbage on it...
I'm gonna... set the building on fire.
Well-well look. I already told you: I deal with the god **** customers so the engineers don't have to. I have people skills; I am good at dealing with people. Can't you understand that? What the **** is wrong with you people?
You know, corporate accounting is sure as **** gonna notice $305,326.13, Michael!
That's what I'm talkin' about when I talk about America!
I'd like to move us right along to a Peter Gibbons. Now we had a chance to meet this young man, and boy that's just a straight shooter with upper management written all over him.
You can just go ahead and move a little bit to the left. Yeah, that's it. Great.
What am I gonna do with 40 subscriptions to Vibe?
Hey Peter, man, check out channel 9, check out this chick.
Hello Peter, whats happening? Ummm, I'm gonna need you to go ahead come in tomorrow. So if you could be here around 9 that would be great, mmmk... oh oh! and I almost forgot ahh, I'm also gonna need you to go ahead and come in on Sunday too, kay. We ahh lost some people this week and ah, we sorta need to play catch up.
There's two more people we can easily lose, and then there's Tom Smykowski... He's useless.  Gone.
Quite a nose, huh? Some people just have a face that sticks in your mind.
Hey, you wanna hear my philosophy of life? Do it to him before he does it to you.
The only arithmetic he ever got was hearing the referee count up to ten.
Boys, this is my church! And if you don't think Christ is down here on the waterfront you've got another guess coming!
You'd better get rid of that gun, unless you haven't got the guts, and if you don't, you'd better hang on to it!
You want to know what's wrong with our waterfront? It's the love of a lousy buck. It's making love of a buck - -the cushy job - -more important than the love of man!
They was giving me ten thousand watts a day, you know, and I'm hot to trot! The next woman takes me on's gonna light up like a pinball machine and pay off in silver dollars!
But I tried, didn't I? Goddamnit, at least I did that.
He-he-he can't hear you. He's a d-d-deaf and d-d-dumb Indian.
Don't admire people too much, they might disappoint you.
A little advice about feelings kiddo; don't expect it always to tickle.
Conrad. Let's have a great Christmas. Let's have... a great year. Let's have the best year of our whole lives. We can, you know... this could be the best one ever.
You know, I think this can be saved. It's a nice clean break.
Torture, torture! It pleasures me!
A pussycat is born to be whipped.
Going somewhere, Kate?
I have a special surprise for you, Mommy!
I'll shoot Mommy if you tell.
It was worse than you thought it would be, wasn't it? Yeah, you with the bad boys now, baby.
Andy. Really... who gives a ****?
You wanted to tussle. We tussled.
Well, the man don't just have to die, Foley. I mean, he could accidentally hurt himself falling down on something real hard, you know? Like a shiv, or my ****?
Hey bank robber! Hey, want some advice? Next time keep the engine running.
You'd be surprised about what you can get, if you ask for it the right way.
You want to take her to my place, get cleaned up, come out of the bathroom with your aftershave on, and she goes "Oh! I had you all wrong."
Alright, now I can say that I ****** a U.S. marshal. Do you think I will?
Shut it... lock it... and get the **** away from it.
Please don't do anything stupid.
What the **** is this? They're not supposed to be here!
My room! definitely my room!
We not anti-white, we anti-oppression! You can't fight racism with racism.
Every Black man you lay eyes on ain't a dope dealer
Some people frown on the Yanks for not being in this war. I'd just like to say that if there are any more back home like you, God help anyone who goes to war with America.
A brilliant man would find a way not to fight a war.
Not anxious to die sir, just anxious to matter.
Man, I am one good-lookin' son-of-a-*****... Don't you ever die.
That's bull-**** MacCawley... but it's very, very good bull-****.
It's not easy making friends here. Two days ago I had a beer with a couple of the RAF pilots. Yesterday both of them got killed.
And I will tell you one thing... leave your goddamn hula shirts at home.
Boys, there's a phrase I want you to memorize, "Wo si yi ge mae guo ren.", it means "I am an American." in Chinese.
Take me to your cinema.
Whatever I photograph I always lose.
I like to understand what I'm shown.
Well, he won't be doing the crossword tonight.
Do you know what the most frightening thing in the world is? It's fear.
Well if it isn't Cecil Beaton...
The silly *****! She's fainted in the wrong scene!
The best thing about being a dentist. Pure pharmaceutical grade. Couple of lines of this, I could drill my own teeth.
Gage, you the one playing games?
You've done it you stupid old man. Now you've got to undo it.
Sometimes dead is better.
Go on, lay down, play dead, be dead!
The barrier was not meant to be crossed. The ground is sour.
Drew, I know your dog died, but get a grip, man, you're freaking me out!
No Brain, no pain... think about it.
Life's full of lessons Drew Buddy, no ones above them. Not you, Not me. Now get in!
Takin' you up the hill, Clyde-buddy. That's the way the Indians did it.
My name's Petulia Danner. I've been married for six months and I haven't had an affair yet.
Some of these people make me sick. But a law's been broken here. You do remember the law, don't you?
Forget everything you've seen on television and in the movies.
The HIV virus can only be transmitted through the exchange of bodily fluids, namely blood, *****, and vaginal secretions.
Now, explain it to me like I'm a four-year-old.
Come on, Stu! Don't you get the game yet?
I'm on my knees beggin' you not to kill me.
What are you gunna do about it up in your ******* high window with your goddamn binoculars?
Something's going on. It has to do with that number. There's an answer in that number.
The Ancient Japanese considered the Go board to be a microcosm of the universe. Although when it is empty it appears to be simple and ordered, in fact, the possibilities of gameplay are endless. They say that no two Go games have ever been alike. Just like snowflakes. So, the Go board actually represents an extremely complex and chaotic universe.
10:15, personal note: It's fair to say I'm stepping out on a limb, but I am on the edge and that's where it happens.
If the number's there I'll find it!
You don't understand it, do you? I don't give a **** about you! I only care about what's in your ******* head! If you won't help us, help yourself. We are forced to comply to the laws of nature. Survival of the fittest Max, and we've got the ******* gun!
Hold on. You have to slow down. You're losing it. You have to take a breath. Listen to yourself. You're connecting a computer bug I had with a computer bug you might have had and some religious hogwash. You want to find the number 216 in the world, you will be able to find it everywhere. 216 steps from a mere street corner to your front door. 216 seconds you spend riding on the elevator. When your mind becomes obsessed with anything, you will filter everything else out and find that thing everywhere.
Happy birthday, Euclid.
How about 748 divided by 238. I got it! What's the answer?
You gave it to those Wall Street ********?
The Torah is just a long string of numbers. Some say that it's a code sent to us from God.
Have you met Archimedes? The one with the black spots, you see? You remember Archimedes of Syracuse, eh? The king asks Archimedes to determine if a present he's received is actually solid gold. Unsolved problem at the time. It tortures the great Greek mathematician for weeks - insomnia haunts him and he twists and turns in his bed for nights on end. Finally, his equally exhausted wife - she's forced to share a bed with this genius - convinces him to take a bath to relax. While he's entering the tub, Archimedes notices the bath water rise. Displacement, a way to determine volume, and that's a way to determine density - weight over volume. And thus, Archimedes solves the problem. He screams "Eureka" and he is so overwhelmed he runs dripping naked through the streets to the king's palace to report his discovery.
You just got killed by a Daewoo Lanos, ************!
It's almost a shame to smoke it. It's like killing a unicorn... with, like, a bomb.
I should call Angie soon... Make up some ********...
Has anyone seen my bigger knife?
I wish we could just go nowhere.
I want you to search the ship and find her. Oh and, uh, she's probably naked.
Do you fear... death? Do you fear that dark abyss? All your deeds laid bare, all your sins punished?
**** you, Jack Sparrow...
Darling, I am truly unhappy to have to tell you this, but through an unfortunate and entirely unforeseeable series of circumstances that had nothing whatsoever to do with me, poor Will has been press-ganged into Davy Jones's crew.
You know, these clothes do not flatter you at all. It should be a dress or nothing. I happen to have no dress in my cabin.
Ah! A heading. Set sail in a... uh... a general... that way! direction.
The Captain goes down with his ship.
I challenge Davy Jones!
I want my jar of dirt!
My tremendous intuitive sense of the female creature informs me that you are troubled.
Have you not met Will Turner? He's noble, heroic - terrific soprano. Worth at least four... maybe three and a half. And did I happen to mention... he's in love? With a girl. Due to be married. Betrothed. Dividing him from her and her from him would only be half as cruel as actually allowing them to be joined in holy matrimony, eh?
Guard the boat, mind the tide... don't touch my dirt.
Heave! Heave like you're being paid for it!
Jack...? Jack Sparrow? I can honestly say I'm glad to see you.
Every man has a price he will willingly accept, even for what he hoped never to sell.
James Norrington, what has the world done to you?
She's only a ship, mate.
Open the chest with the key, and stab the heart. No-no-no-no. Don't stab the heart. The Dutchman needs a living heart, or there'll be no captain. And if there's no captain, there's no one to have the key.
One word love: curiosity. You long for freedom. You long to do what you want to do because you want it. To act on selfish impulse. You want to see what it's like. One day you won't be able to resist.
Come on, lads! Lift it like a lady's skirt!
Keep a weather eye on the horizon.
Leave 'im lie... unless you're planning to use him to hit somethin' with.
Still rooting for you, mate!
Anido. Anido! Follow my voice, follow my voice! To the left. No! Other left. Go ... No, that's a tree.
Turns out not even Jack Sparrow can best the devil!
Jack Sparrow... Our debt is settled.
You'll have the chance to do something... something courageous. And when you do, you'll discover something. That you're a good man.
Oh, Mother Carey's chickens! What happened?
I could join the circus!
How do you know of the key?
It's the Bible, you get credit for trying!
All you people are so scared of me. Most days I'd take that as a compliment. But it ain't me you gotta worry about now.
People, just a suggestion. Perhaps you should *flee*!
Like I said, it ain't me you gotta worry about.
I truly don't know what's gonna happen when the lights go out Carolyn but I do know, once the dying starts, this little psycho **** family of ours is gonna rip itself apart.
Don't touch it! Don't- Don't you touch that handle!
So... I guess something went wrong.
Did not know who he was ******' with.
You're dancing on razor blades here.
Back to the ship, huh? Just huddled together, until the lights burn out? 'Til you can't see what's eating you? Is that the big plan?
I said I'd die for them not you Come on!
Strong survival instinct. I admire that in a woman.
Say, I interviewed a swell guy the other day: Einstein. Yeh, swell guy. Little eccentric, but a swell - doesn't wear, doesn't wear any garters. Neither do I, as a matter of fact.
I know what's wrong. I'm colorblind. That's what wrong, I'm colorblind. I've been sitting here for a half-hour looking at you, and I don't know yet whether your eyes are blue or violet.
Yeah, I know those bluenoses. Their ancestors refused to come over on the Mayflower because they didn't want to rub elbows with the tourists... so they swam over!
I've met some roughies in my time, but you are without a doubt the lowest excuse for a man I've ever had the misfortune to meet
Anne Schuyler's in the blue book; you're not even in the phone book. Think that one over... sucker!
Somebody once wrote: "**** is the impossibility of reason." That's what this place feels like. ****.
I'm glad I ain't going with them. Somewhere out there is the beast and he's hungry tonight.
Excuses are like assholes, Taylor. Everybody's got one!
You ignorant *******! What the **** coordinates you giving? You wasted a lot of people back there with your ****** up fire mission! You know that? You know know that? Aw ****!
Y'all loved Elias. And you want to kick ***. Yeah. Well, here I am, all by my lonesome. And there ain't anybody gonna know. Six of you boys against me. Kill me.  Yeah. I **** on all of you!
Kiss my ***, man. I never thought I'd get hit!
Death? What you all know about death?
You all take a good look at this lump of ****. Remember what it looks like. You **** up in a firefight... and I goddamn guarantee you a trip out of the bush - in a body bag! Out here, assholes, you keep your **** wired tight at all times! And that goes for you, ****-for-brains. You don't sleep on no ******' ambush! And the next sum'bitch I catch coppin Z's in the bush, I'm personally gonna take an interest in seein' him suffer. I **** you not. Doc, tag him and bag him!
I think now, looking back, we did not fight the enemy; we fought ourselves. The enemy was in us. The war is over for me now, but it will always be there, the rest of my days. As I'm sure Elias will be, fighting with Barnes for what Rhah called "possession of my soul." There are times since, I've felt like a child, born of those two fathers. But be that as it may, those of us who did make it have an obligation to build again. To teach to others what we know, and to try with what's left of our lives to find a goodness and a meaning to this life.
The village, which had stood for maybe a thousand years, didn't know we were coming that day. If they had, they would've run. Barnes was the eye of our rage. And through him, our captain Ahab, we would set things right again. That day we loved him.
Elias was full of ****. Elias was a crusader. Now I got no problem with any man does what he's told, but when he don't, the machine breaks down. And when the machine breaks down, WE break down. And I'm not gonna allow that, from any of you. Not one.
I love this place at night. The stars... there's no right or wrong in them. They're just there.
Shut up! Shut up and take the pain! Take the pain!
Up until now everything around here has been, well, pleasant. Recently certain things have become unpleasant. Now, it seems to me that the first thing we have to do is to separate out the things that are pleasant from the things that are unpleasant.
HELLO! I've got like three pounds of underwire on here!
I did the **** thing, David. It got kinda old.
Well, I better get going. Your show's almost on.
It was so amazing, Daff! I was like, "So, my mom's gonna be out of town," and he was like, "Yeah? Well, maybe we could..." and I was like, "Yeah, sure," and he was like, "Cool,"... I know! He is so smart!
I'm getting a little concerned about what I'm seeing on some of these reruns.
Well, he's not homeless, Howard, they just don't say where he lives. - Well, it's a silly question! - Because nobody's homeless in Pleasantville. 'Cause that's just not what it's like.
I could, like, kill a guy with these things.
It's just... where am I going to see colors like that?
Speak into the microphone, squid brain!
You know nothing. In fact, you know less than nothing. If you knew that you knew nothing, then that would be something, but you don't.
Fear causes hesitation, and hesitation will cause your worst fears to come true.
...last time you had a feeling I had to kill a guy, and I hate that... It looks bad on my report.
Reagan usually does the driving. Stolen switch car. They leave it running... on the curb. It look sparked from the distance. When they run they dump the vehicle and they vanish... like a virgin on prom night. I mean they vanish, swishh...
I know Johnny. I know you want me so bad it's like acid in your mouth. But, not this time.
I'm so hungry I could eat the *** end out of a dead rhino, I should have had you get me three of these things!
Welcome to Sea World, Kid.
You gonna jump or jerk off?
He looks just like his father.
Some folks has a lot of things around them that shines for other peoples. I think that maybe some of them was in tunnels. And in that tunnel, the only light they had, was inside of them. And then long after they escape that tunnel, they sitll be shining for everybody else.
There's always something wrong with these tests. These tests paint a picture of me with no brain. These tests paint a picture of me and my mother, my whole family as less than dumb. Just ugly black grease, need to be wiped away, find a job for.
The other day, I cried. But you know what? **** that day. That's why God, or whoever, makes other days.
Run! Get to the chopper!
You set us up. It was ********, all of it.
You're ghostin' us, ************. I don't care who you are back in the world, you give away our position one more time, I'll bleed ya, real quiet. Leave ya here. Got that?
If it bleeds, we can kill it.
She says the jungle... it just came alive and took him.
Maybe you better put her on a leash, Agent-man.
When I was little, we found a man. He looked like - like, butchered. The old woman in the village crossed themselves... and whispered crazy things, strange things. "El Diablo cazador de hombres." Only in the hottest years this happens. And this year, it grows hot. We begin finding our men. We found them sometimes without their skins... and sometimes much, much worse. "El cazador trofeo de los hombres" means the demon who makes trophies of men.
That's a real ***** habit you got there.
Come on in, you fuckers. Come on in. Ol' Painless is waitin'.
Not a thing. Not a ******* trace. No blood, no bodies... We hit nothing!
So, what are you gonna try next? Cheese?
I don't know, Dutch. This is inhuman.
Fifty bucks, Grandpa. For seventy-five, the wife can watch.
Oops... slippery little suckers.
Mother! Oh God, mother! Blood! Blood!
Well, a son is a poor substitute for a lover.
They tell you what its ingredients are, and how it's guaranteed to exterminate every insect in the world, but they do not tell you whether or not it's painless. And-and I say, insect or man,  death should always be painless.
We're always quickest to doubt people who have a reputation for being honest.
She might have fooled me, but she didn't fool my mother.
Well I'm not a fool. And I'm not capable of being fooled! Not even by a woman.
I'll lick the stamps.
Like I said... the mother... Now to understand it the way I understood it, hearing it from the mother... that is, from the mother half of Norman's mind... you have to go back ten years, to the time when Norman murdered his mother and her lover. Now he was already dangerously disturbed, had been ever since his father died. His mother was a clinging, demanding woman, and for years the two of them lived as if there was no one else in the world. Then she met a man... and it seemed to Norman that she 'threw him over' for this man. Now that pushed him over the line and he killed 'em both. Matricide is probably the most unbearable crime of all... most unbearable to the son who commits it. So he had to erase the crime, at least in his own mind. He stole her corpse. A weighted coffin was buried. He hid the body in the fruit cellar. Even treated it to keep it as well as it would keep. And that still wasn't enough. She was there! But she was a corpse. So he began to think and speak for her, give her half his time, so to speak. At times he could be both personalities, carry on conversations. At other times, the mother half took over completely. Now he was never all Norman, but he was often only mother. And because he was so pathologically jealous of her, he assumed that she was jealous of him. Therefore, if he felt a strong attraction to any other woman, the mother side of him would go wild.  When he met your sister, he was touched by her... aroused by her. He wanted her. That set off the 'jealous mother' and 'mother killed the girl'! Now after the murder, Norman returned as if from a deep sleep. And like a dutiful son, covered up all traces of the crime he was convinced his mother had committed!
Oh, we have 12 vacancies. 12 cabins, 12 vacancies.
I think I must have one of those faces you can't help believing.
Well, if it doesn't jell, it isn't aspic, and this ain't jellin'!
You wanna know if we're armed? We're armed.
We're having too good a time today. We ain't thinking about tomorrow.
Well if it isn't the man who shot Pretty-Boy Floyd. Good thing 'cause he sure wasn't Whiz-Kid Floyd.
I was raised on a farm in Moooresville, Indiana. My mama ran out on us when I was three, my daddy beat the **** out of me cause he didn't know no better way to raise me. I like baseball, movies, good clothes, fast cars, whiskey, and you... what else you need to know?
When my Johnny finds out how you slapped around his girl, you know what's going to happen to you, fat boy?
The night of the fight, you may feel a slight sting. That's pride ******* with you. **** pride. Pride only hurts, it never helps.
That's a pretty ******* good milkshake. I don't know if it's worth five dollars but it's pretty ******* good.
That's how you're gonna beat 'em, Butch. They keep underestimating you.
Well, the way they make shows is, they make one show. That show's called a pilot. Then they show that show to the people who make shows, and on the strength of that one show they decide if they're going to make more shows. Some pilots get picked and become television programs. Some don't, become nothing. She starred in one of the ones that became nothing.
Why the **** didn't you tell us somebody was in the bathroom? Slipped your mind? Did you forget that somebody was in there with a goddamn hand cannon?
Now, if you'll excuse me, I'm going to go home and have a heart attack.
**** Negro! That's all you had to say!
Uuummmm, this is a tasty burger!
The path of the righteous man is beset on all sides by the iniquities of the selfish and the tyranny of evil men. Blessed is he who, in the name of charity and good will, shepherds the weak through the valley of darkness, for he is truly his brother's keeper and the finder of lost children. And I will strike down upon thee with great vengeance and furious anger those who would attempt to poison and destroy My brothers. And you will know My name is the Lord when I lay My vengeance upon thee.
Hey, my name's Paul and this shit's between y'all.
Hamburgers. The cornerstone of any nutritious breakfast.
I'm not even ******* joking with you, man. Do not be bringing some ****** up Poopa to my house!
My name's Pitt, and your *** ain't talkin' your way outta this ****.
Mind if I have some of your tasty beverage to wash this down with?
Jules, if you give that ******' nimrod fifteen hundred dollars, I'm gonna shoot him on general principles.
If my answers frighten you then you should cease asking scary questions.
I'm prepared to scour the the Earth for that ************. If Butch goes to Indochina, I want a ****** waiting in a bowl of rice ready to pop a cap in his ***.
I do believe Marsellus Wallace, my husband, your boss, told you to take ME out and do WHATEVER I WANTED. Now I wanna dance, I wanna win. I want that trophy, so dance good.
That's the Marilyn Monroe section that's Mamie Van Doren... I don't see Jayne Mansfield, she must have the night off or something.
****! Of all the ******* things she could forget, she forgets my father's watch!  I specifically reminded her - bedside table! On the Kangaroo! I said the words, "Don't forget my father's watch."
I didn't ask for a shrink - that must've been somebody else. Also, that pudding isn't mine. Also, I'm wearing this suit today because I had a very important meeting this morning and I don't have a crying problem.
You can go to places in the world with pudding. That's funny.
Lena. I'm so sorry. I'm so sorry I left you at the hospital. I called a phone-*** line... I called a phone-*** line before I met you, and four blond brothers came after me and they hurt you, and I'm sorry. Then I had to leave again because I wanted to make sure you never got hurt again. And I have a lot of puddings, and in six to eight weeks it can be redeemed. So if you could just give me that much time, I think I can get enough mileage to go with you wherever you go if you have to travel for your work. Because I don't ever want to be anywhere without you. So could you just let me redeem the mileage?
It really looks like Hawaii here.
People are just crazy in this world, I think.
I'm gonna crack your ******* skull.
Your lips would make a lollipop too happy.
God got Wendy's periods reversed. About every 28 days she starts acting nice. Lasts about a weekend.
What are you? Stupid or something? Why don't you watch where you're going?
With all my black little heart.
Come out, come out, wherever you are.
Take this beast back to his cage!
I am not the first man God has asked to shed blood in his name. And I am not of the last.
You prefer a book to your husband's company? Well no wonder, I'm only flesh and blood - that's no match for the printed page!
Why should I love God? He strung up his only son like a side of veal. I shudder to think what he'd do to me.
I love you Madeleine... as a child of God.
It's an entire religion based on an oxymoron.
You can't be a proper writer without a touch of madness, can you?
You know how I define idealism, Monsieur Delbenet? Youth's final luxury.
Ah, you've come to read my trousers.
He's a writer, not a madman.
Are your convictions so fragile they cannot stand in opposition to mine? Is your god so flimsey, so weak! For shame.
I didn't create this world of ours. I merely recorded it.
Welcome to our humble madhouse, Doctor. I trust you'll find yourself at home.
Tell him I'm no fool, a prison's still a prison, even with Chinese silks and chandeliers.
Conversation, like certain portions of the anatomy, always runs more smoothly when lubricated.
Don't come any closer Abbe, God's watching.
If I wasn't such a bad woman on the page, I couldn't be such a good woman in life.
Some things belong on paper, others in life. It's a blessed fool who can't tell the difference.
Your terrible secret revealed, you're a man after all.
You've already stolen my heart... as well as another more prominent organ, south of the Equator.
My glorious prose filtered through the minds of the insane. Who knows, they might improve it.
Listen to me Abbe and listen well. I've stared into the face of evil and I've lived to tell the tale and now, I beg you, for your sake, let me write it down.
What you need, darling, is a long, slow *****
Some men are beyond redemption.
If you cure him, I mean really cure him, harness the beast that rages in his soul.
If you're going to martyr yourself Abbe, do it for God, not the chambermaid.
It's a powerful aphrodisiac, isn't it? Having power over another man.
All you young people who applauded can go **** yourselves!
Shut up. You just shut up. I'll ******* take care of you later.
I tried to stand up and fly straight, but it wasn't easy with that sumbitch Reagan in the White House. I dunno. They say he's a decent man, so maybe his advisors are confused.
Mighty fine cereal flakes, Mrs. McDonough.
Here you are sitting on your butt playing house with a... Don't get me wrong, H.I., a fine woman but one who seems like she needs one of those button-down types.
Give me that baby, you warthog from ****!
Anyone found bipedal in five wears his *** for a hat!
Biology and the prejudices of others conspired to keep us childless.
Welcome Home Son... ? Where's he been?
Son, you got a panty on your head.
You know what I think? I think you're an evil man. I think this is a shakedown. It's nothing but a Goddamn *****-job. I think you took Nathan Jr.  And you, my fine friend, are the one who's gonna get his butt kicked.
Nathan Jr accepts me for what I am! And I think you better had, too! You know I'm okay, you're okay! That there's what it is!
This is Gale and Evelle Snoats. As fine a pair as ever... broke and entered!
Sometimes it's a hard world for small things.
Dammit, are you boys gonna chase down your leads or are you gonna sit drinkin' coffee in the one house in the state where I know my boy ain't at?
I"m in here on my knees, Ed, a free man proposing. Howdy, Kurt.
Name's Smalls. Leonard Smalls. My friends call me Lenny... only I ain't got no friends.
I know you're partial to convenient stores, but dammit, H.I., the sun doesn't rise and set on the corner grocery.
Got you on an awful short leash, don't she, H.I.?
Well, H.I., looks like you've been up to the devil's business.
Eight hundred leaf-tables and no chairs? You can't sell leaf-tables and no chairs. Chairs, you got a dinette set. No chairs, you got ****!
H.I., you're young and you got your health, what you want with a job?
Gubmint do take a bite, don't she?
We need someone handy with a scatter gun to cover them hayseeds while we go in there and get that cash!
That Buford's a sly one. Already knows his ABC's. Hit the deck, boy!
Say, did you hear about the person of the Polish persuasion who walked into a bar with a big 'ol pile of **** in his hands and he says, "Look what I almost stepped in"?
Mind you don't cut yourself, Mordecai.
You wet yourself! You wet yourself! Mr.McDunnough wet himself, Daddy!
Rose isn't dead, son, not really. Some of us die, some of us don't. Rose lives!  Don't worry about it, boy. She's at rest with Mother and the creator of the universe. She's at rest with Mother.
Like you said Colonel, he went home.
Wolf Den this is Lone Wolf do you read? Prepare for emergency landing, arriving with American POWs.
Sir, do we get to win this time?
Would you qualify that as a launch problem or a design problem?
Moles and trolls, moles and trolls, work, work, work, work, work. We never see the light of day. We plan this thing for weeks and all they want to do is study. I'm disgusted. I'm sorry but it's not like me, I'm depressed. There was what, no one at the mutant hamster races, we only had one entry into the Madame Curie look-alike contest and he was disqualified later. Why do I bother?
Look at it this way. Considering the type of people you are and the environment you're in, you have to admit the strong possibility this may be the only chance you ever have in your entire lives... to have ***.
Welcome to Pacific Tech's "Smart People on Ice".
I'm sorry. It's just that I didn't want you guys to think I was stuffy. You know, no fun. All brain, no *****.
You wanted to see me, Your Joggingness?
Do you mind if I name my first child after you? "Dipshit Knight" has a nice ring to it.
The Crossbow Project. There's No Defense Like a Good Offense.
Well, I guess it goes from God, to Jerry to you to the cleaners. Right, Kent?
I never sleep, I don't know why. I had a roommate and I drove her nuts, I mean really nuts, they had to take her away in an ambulance and everything. But she's okay now, but she had to transfer to an easier school, but I don't know if that had anything to do with being my fault. But listen, if you ever need to talk or you need help studying just let me know, 'cause I'm just a couple doors down from you guys and I never sleep, okay?
I can hear you now: "Get out of my life, you wonderful woman. You're too good for me."
I'm not much on rear window ethics.
When I married Miles, we were both a couple of maladjusted misfits. We are still maladjusted misfits, and we have loved every minute of it.
You haven't spent much time around cemeteries, have you?
Jeff, you've got a lot to learn about homicide. Why, morons have committed murders so shrewdly that it's taken a hundred trained police minds to catch them.
Jeff, you know if someone came in here, they wouldn't believe what they'd see? You and me with long faces plunged into despair because we find out a man didn't kill his wife. We're two of the most frightening ghouls I've ever known.
Mind if I use that portable keyhole?
Intelligence. Nothing has caused the human race so much trouble as intelligence.
Why would Thorwald want to kill a little dog? Because it knew too much?
Well, if there's one thing I know, it's how to wear the proper clothes.
I've got the bullets!
I don't want any trouble.
I woke up this morning, you know... and the sun was shining, and it was nice, and all that type of stuff. And the first thing, I saw you, and, uh, I said, "Boy, this is gonna be one terrific day, so you better live it up, because tomorrow you'll be nothing." You see? And I almost was.
You're tearing me apart!
Why did you shoot those puppies, John?
If I had one day when I didn't have to be all confused and I didn't have to feel that I was ashamed of everything. If I felt that I belonged someplace. You know?
I don't know what to do anymore. Except maybe die.
I didn't chicken. You saw where I jumped. What did I have to do, kill myself?
They think I can make friends if we move. Just move, everything will be roses and sunshine.
If he had guts to knock Mom cold once, then maybe she'd be happy and then she'd stop picking on him. Because they make mush out of him! Just mush!
What does he know about man alone?
Man, they got a **** load of cookies!
Ever since you started going to night school you've been giving me headaches.
I had better *** in prison.
'Tis the season, convict.
It says here the retail industry does 50% of its business between December 1st and December 25th. That's half a year's business in one month's time. It seems to me, an intelligent country would legislate a second such gift giving holiday. Create, say, a Christmas 2, late May, early June, to further stimulate growth.
I read your letters, convict. Don't play no reindeer games with me.
That's why chicks dig you, man. They love this freaky, poetic ****.
Your middle name is Keets? God, your parents are pretentious!
What the **** happened in the kitchen? Looks like somebody's water broke in there.
Gandhi said that whatever you do in life will be insignificant. But it's very important that you do it. I tend to agree with the first part.
Whatever you do in life will be insignificant, but it's very important that you do it, because nobody else will.
He's in love with you. I've only ever seen him look at one other girl the way he looks at you, and she's a lot shorter and shares his DNA.
Look at 'em, ordinary ******* people, I hate 'em.
Hey buddy, how you doing, huh? Hey, don't you remember me? I was in here yesterday. Listen, I think I left a book o' matches over in your office over there. You wanna go check it out for me, huh?
Good evening, Otto. This is Agent Rogersz. I'm going to ask you a few questions. Since time is short and you may lie, I'm going to have to torture you. But I want you to know, it isn't personal.
Tense situations, kid. You get into five or six of 'em a day, it don't mean **** anymore. I mean, I've seen men stabbed, didn't mean **** to me. I've seen guns, guns too, they don't mean ****. But that's when you gotta watch yourself.
The life of a repo man is always intense.
Hey. I know you. You're the one that run into my trash.
You say our names, we're going to have to kill all these people, Archie.
Okay. Have a nice day, Uh, night.  Night, day, doesn't mean ****.
Find one in every car. You'll see.
Put your seatbelt on, boy. I don't ride with anybody 'less they wear their seatbelt. It's one of my rules.
Don't care how long it takes, ******! Repo Man's got all night, every night.
You repo men, you're all out to ******' lunch.
It happens sometimes. People just explode. Natural causes.
You gonna give me my car, or do I gotta go to your house and shove your dog's head down the toilet?
Never broke into a car, never hotwired a car. Never broke into a truck. 'I shall not cause harm to any vehicle nor the personal contents thereof, nor through inaction let the personal contents thereof come to harm' It's what I call the Repo Code, kid!
Beautiful evening; you can almost see the stars...
Best god-**** car on the lot...
I walk into someone's place of work, they **** scared. They know I'm not a cop, think I've come to kill 'em. And I would. I'll kill anybody who crosses me. Know what I mean?
Goddamn-dipshit-Rodriguez-gypsy-*****-punks. I'll get your ***.
You ever feel as if your mind had started to erode?
Some weird ******' ****, eh, Bud?
I might break you in, Nice Guy, but I'd make you my dog's *****.
All right ramblers, let's get rambling!
Hey, I've changed my mind. Shoot this piece of ****, will ya?
Do you know what this is? It's the world's smallest violin playing just for the waitresses.
If you shoot this man, you die next. Repeat. If you shoot this man, you die next.
Larry, stop pointin' that ******' gun at my Dad!
Either he's alive or he's dead, or the cops got him... or they don't.
Ain't that a sad sight, Daddy, the man walks in the prison a white man, walks out talkin' like a ******' ******. You know what, I think it's all that black ***** been pumped up your *** so far, now it's backed into your ****** brain, and it's coming out your mouth!
You kids shouldn't play so rough. Somebody's gonna start cryin'.
The choice between doing ten years and taking out some stupid ************, ain't no choice at all. But I ain't no madman.
I'm very sorry the government taxes their tips, that's ****** up. That ain't my fault. It would seem to me that waitresses are one of the many groups the government ***** in the *** on a regular basis. Look, if you ask me to sign something that says the government shouldn't do that, I'll sign it, put it to a vote, I'll vote for it, but what I won't do is play ball. And as for this non-college ******** I got two words for that: learn to ******' type, 'cause if you're expecting me to help out with the rent you're in for a big ******' surprise.
I don't wanna kill anybody. But if I gotta get out that door, and you're standing in my way, one way or the other, you're gettin' outta my way.
I saw a whole other future. I can't stop seeing it.
Tell me the truth, Frank, remember that? We used to live by it. And you know what's so good about the truth? Everyone knows what it is however long they've lived without it. No one forgets the truth, Frank, they just get better at lying.
I've never really been anywhere.
Frank Wheeler, I think you're the most interesting person I've ever met.
Knowing what you've got, knowing what you need, knowing what you can do without - That's inventory control.
It takes backbone to lead the life you want, Frank.
Just because you've got me safe in this little trap, you think you can bully me into feeling whatever you want me to feel!
If being crazy means living life as if it matters, then I don't mind being completely insane.
Tomo-chan told me to.
There is nothing to understand. Only this: I am a man who could have been great, but was not.
I swear, you and that guy Disney, in love with the **** rats.
Come my friend! Make his sacrifice an act of honor! Come now.
Show them the courage of Allah!
The hospitality in this country is as warm as the weather.
This is English courage.
How did your uneducated kind ever take Jerusalem?
Why are you talking to the Piper, Roman? You're madder than I am.
They say there are only two days you enjoy a boat; the day you buy it and the day you sell it.
Think before you drink before you drive me mad.
Don't hurt me Arch... I'm only little!
That, Roman and Mickey, is the famous Archie Slap.
He tried to poison me, that dirty Cossack!
Beauty is a cruel mistress, is it not?
You want me to take a shot? All right.  I'll take a shot!
I wanna kiss ya-ya don't have to kiss me back if ya don't feel like it.
You gotta be a moron... you gotta be a *moron* to wanna be a fighter.
I just want to say hi to my girlfriend, OK? Yo, Adrian! It's me, Rocky.
I've never seen a fighter that concerned about his hair.
Stay in school and use your brain. Be a doctor, be a lawyer, carry a leather briefcase. Forget about sports as a profession. Sports make ya grunt and smell. See, be a thinker, not a stinker.
You do that to Apollo Creed, they'll put us in jail for murder.
Don't you think I hear things?
I'd like to kill the freaking guy who broke this mirror.
He jests at scars that never felt a wound.
Thy drugs are quick. Thus with a kiss I die.
A plague o' both your houses! They have made worms' meat of me.
Either thou, or I, or both must go with him!
Peace? Peace. I hate the word, as I hate ****, all Montagues, and thee.
The world is not thy friend, nor the world's law.
Did my heart love 'til now? Forswear its sight. For I never saw true beauty 'til this night.
Well, Juliet, I will lie with thee tonight.
What sayest thou? Hast though not a word of joy? Some comfort, Nurse.
Eyes, look your last! Arms, take your last embrace!
A dog of the house of Capulet moves me!
Tempt not a desperate man!
You kiss by the book.
My only love sprung from my only hate! Too early seen unknown, and known too late! Prodigious birth of love it is to me that I must love a loathed enemy.
Romeo, thou art a villain.
Part, fools! Put up your swords. You know not what you do!
Not proud you have, but thankful you have. Proud can I never be of what I hate!
Do you bite your thumb at us, sir?
A glooming peace this morning with it brings. The sun for sorrow will not show his head. Go hence and have more talk of these sad things. Some shall be pardoned, and some punished. For never was a story of more woe than this of Juliet and her Romeo.
How art thou out of breath when thou hast breath to say to me that thou art out of breath? Is the news good or bad, answer to that.
Rebellious subjects! Enemies to peace! Throw your mistempered weapons to the ground!
Be not so long to speak; I long to die!
A pretty piece of flesh I am!
But, soft! what light through yonder window breaks? It is the east, and Juliet is the sun.
I will bite my thumb at them, which is a disgrace to them, if they bear it.
Ask for me tomorrow, and you shall find me a grave man.
My only love sprung from my only hate. Too early seen unknown, and known too late.
Did my heart love till now? forswear it, sight! For I ne'er saw true beauty till this night.
Consort? What, dost thou make us minstrels? If thou makes us minstrels, look to hear nothing but discords. Here's my fiddlestick  ; here's that will make you dance. Zounds, consort!
A glooming peace this morning with it brings. The sun for sorrow will not show his head. For never was a story of more woe Than this of Juliet and her Romeo.
Good night, good night. Parting is such sweet sorrow, That I shall say good night till it be morrow.
Thus with a kiss I die.
Where be these enemies? Capulet! Montague! See, what a scourge is laid upon your hate, That heaven finds means to kill your joys with love! And I, for winking at your discords too, Have lost a brace of kinsmen. All are punish'd.
If you don't mind, I'm gonna pass out.
All good things come to those who wait.
SHAZAM! I think I'm in Mayberry.
Look, I guarantee there'll be tough times. I guarantee that at some point, one or both of us is gonna want to get out of this thing. But I also guarantee that if I don't ask you to be mine, I'll regret it for the rest of my life, because I know, in my heart, you're the only one for me.
"How does she get all those guys to propose? She's not even that beautiful." Bite me, paper boy!
Hi, I'm Cindy, Maggie's unmarried cousin.
Have you heard my husband's morning show? "Wake Up With Flem?"
I can't believe I flew 10,000 miles for this ****!
What's wrong with you man? You never step in front of a black man at a buffet line.
I hate that fortune cookie ****.
What was that? Did you just pick up another case? Did we just take another **** case on my vacation?
All he wanted was some Mushu.
All right, listen up! All the Triads and the ugly women on this side, and all the fine women on this side, right now!
No, I'm Lee's new muscle. And don't let this robe fool you, this is the only color they had left.
I don't like my chickens alive, I like 'em dead and deep fried. You ever heard of Popeye's?
I'm gonna give you an L.A.P.D ***-whuppin'!
I'm gonna pretend you a man. A very beautiful man with a great body that I'd like to take to the movies.
Don't be messing with me, Lee. I will kick your ***. I'll hit you so hard you'll end up in the Ming Dynasty. I mean it, I'll ***** slap you back to Bangkok!
That's my CD! Don't you ever touch a Chinese man's CD!
I think someone better call the police.
I was punched in the face. What's your excuse?
My top schools where I want to apply to are Oxford and the Sorbonne. My safety's Harvard.
I always wanted to be in one of your ******' plays.
I just wanted to say, I'm sorry I threw rocks at you that day.
You know, you and Herman deserve each other. You're both little children.
She's in love with a dead guy anyway.
Mmm, I'm a little bit lonely these days
Oh yeah and with friends like you who needs friends?
I know about you and the teacher.
Also, you'll find a pair of safety glasses and some earplugs under your seats. Please feel free to use them.
I don't give a **** about the barracudas, **** it! I'm building it anyway.
Kids don't like it when their parents get divorced.
Tell that stupid Mick he just made my list of things to do today.
I'm sorry, I just came by to thank you for WRECKING MY LIFE!
That's how easy it is to give to charity around here. Don't put your **** on the floor.
This time the mission is the man.
Dr. Gordon, this is your wake-up call. Everyday of your working life you have given people the news that they're gonna die soon. Now *you* will be the cause of death. Your aim in this game is to kill Adam. You have until six on the clock to do it. There's a man in the room with you. When there's that much poison in your blood, the only thing left to do - is shoot yourself. There are ways to win this, hidden all around you. Just remember, X marks the spot for the treasure. If you do not kill Adam by six, then Alison and Diana will die, Dr. Gordon... and I'll leave you in this room to rot. Let the game begin.
The key to that chain is in the bathtub.
He doesn't want us to cut through our chains. He wants us to cut through our feet!
Dont look at me... I can't help you.
Goodnight little girl.
You want to know what I do? I'm paid to follow rich guys like you who go to seedy, out-of-the-way motels to **** their secretaries.
You know, we arrested a dentist last week who liked to play with kids a bit too much. He lived two blocks from here. The sewer lines run under this neighborhood too, doctor.
Who said anything about a warrant?
Hello, Paul. You are a perfectly healthy, sane and middle-class male yet last month you ran a straight razor across your wrist. Did you cut yourself because you truly wanted to die or did you just want some attention? Tonight, you'll show me. The irony is that if you want to die you just have to stay where you are, but if you want to live, you'll have to cut yourself again. Find the path through the razor-wire to the door but hurry. At 3:00 that door will lock and then, this room becomes your tomb. How much blood will you shed to stay alive?
You know what capitalism is? Getting ******!
Another Quaalude, and she'll be mine again.
Don't get it confused, Tony. I don't **** around with the *help*.
Every dog has his day.
You can't tell me what to do, Tony. No more. I am not a baby anymore. I'll do what I wanna do. I'll see whoever I wanna see. And if I wanna **** 'em, Tony, then I'll **** 'em!
You wanna **** with me? Okay. You wanna play rough? Okay. Say hello to my little friend!
I told you a long time ago, you ******* little monkey, not to **** ME!
Okay, Caracicatriz. You can die too. It makes no difference to me.
Now you're talking to me baby! That I like! Keep it coming!
In May 1980, Fidel Castro opened the harbor at Mariel, Cuba with the apparent intention of letting some of his people join their relatives in the United States. Within seventy-two hours, 3,000 U.S. boats were headed for Cuba. It soon became evident that Castro was forcing the boat owners to carry back with them not only their relatives, but the dregs of his jails. Of the 125,000 refugees that landed in Florida an estimated 25,000 had criminal records.
Nothing exceeds like excess. You should know that, Tony.
Hey! Will you shut the **** up and let me sing?
You gotta be quicker than that, pencil ****.
So the man can turn out a hinge in less than a minute, why the long story?
We give you a Jewish girl at five marks a day, Oskar. You should kiss us, not them. God forbid you ever get a real taste for Jewish skirt, there's no future in it. They don't have a future. That's not just good old fashioned Jew hating talk. It's policy now.
My father was fond of saying you need three things in life - a good doctor, a forgiving priest, and a clever accountant. The first two, I've never had much use for.
It's Hebrew, it's from the Talmud. It says, "Whoever saves one life, saves the world entire."
This is very cruel, Oskar. You're giving them hope. You shouldn't do that. *That's* cruel!
Stern, if this factory ever produces a shell that can actually be fired, I'll be very unhappy.
They cast a spell on you, you know, the Jews. When you work closely with them, like I do, you see this. They have this power. It's like a virus. Some of my men are infected with this virus. They should be pitied, not punished. They should receive treatment because this is as real as typhus. I see it all the time. It's a matter of money? Hmm?
Gentlemen, thank you very much. I think I can guarantee you- you'll both be in Southern Russia before the end of the month. Good day.
There's always some stupid ******** reason to kill your girlfriend. That's the beauty of it all! Simplicity! Besides, if it gets too complicated, you lose your target audience.
"I'll send you a copy." BAM! ***** went down. "I'll send you a copy." BAM! Sid! Superbitch!
What's your favorite scary movie?
Billy and his ***** don't deserve you.
That woman was a ****-bag ***** who flashed her **** all over town like she was Sharon Stone or something.
Mmmm... corn syrup. Same stuff they used for pig's blood in "Carrie."
You make me so sick. Your entire havoc-inducing, thieving, whoring generation disgusts me.
Look, Kenny, I know you're about fifty pounds overweight, but when I say hurry, please interpret that as MOVE YOUR FAT TUB OF LARD *** NOW!
Who am I? The beer wench?
What's the matter Sidney? You look like you've seen a ghost.
Why can't I be a Meg Ryan movie? Or even a good porno.
Now that Billy tried to mutilate her, do you think Sid would go out with me?
It's called subtlety, Stu. You should look it up.
If you were the only suspect in a senseless bloodbath - would you be standing in the horror section?
It's so sad. Her mom and dad found her hanging from a tree limb, her insides on the outside.
Cut Casper, that's a wrap!
What do I have to do to prove to you that I'm not a killer?
We all go a little mad sometimes.
No, please don't kill me, Mr. Ghostface, I wanna be in the sequel!
Drink with your brains, that's our motto.
Look, local woman! I know you hold me up as your career template and that it gives you some sort of charge to challenge me, but give it a rest.
Hey, you'd better check your conscience at the door sweetie. I'm not here to be loved.
How do you know that my dimwitted inexperience isn't merely a subtle form of manipulation, used to lower people's expectations, thereby enhancing my ability to effectively manuever within any given situation?
Come on. You have made millions off the story of her murder. You're obsessed with her and you're obsessed with her daughter.
Oh, it's rough being friends with you, Sid.  When you're friends with Sid, you die.
My client says there are two more bodies... two more victims, hidden away. He will take Detectives Mills and Somerset to these bodies, but only Detectives Mills and Somerset. Only at six o'clock today.
Get out of the ******* HALL, police!
If John Doe's head splits open and a UFO should fly out, I want you to have expected it.
It's impressive to see a man feeding off his emotions.
You got what you deserved.
This isn't going to have a happy ending.
Love is not love which alters when it alteration finds. Or bends with the remover to remove. Oh no! It is an ever fixed mark that looks on tempests and is never shaken. Willoughby. Willoughby. Willoughby.
Marianne, can you play something else? Mamma has been weeping since breakfast.  I meant something LESS mournful dearest.
He is certainly not so dashing as Willoughby. But he has a far more pleasing countenance. There was, at times, if you'll remember, something in Willoughby's eyes that I did not like.
All I want, all I've ever wanted is the quiet of a private life, but my mother wants me distinguished.
I am the soul of discretion.
He is the kindest and best of men.
What do you know of my heart? What do you know of anything but your own suffering. For weeks, Marianne, I've had this pressing on me without being at liberty to speak of it to a single creature. It was forced on me by the very person whose prior claims ruined all my hope. I have endured her exultations again and again whilst knowing myself to be divided from Edward forever. Believe me, Marianne, had I not been bound to silence I could have provided proof enough of a broken heart, even for you.
We were talking of London, ma'am, and all its diversions.
Marianne, please try... I cannot... I cannot do without you. Oh, please, I have tried to bear everything else... I will try... but please, dearest, beloved Marianne, do not leave me alone.
Oh, you are the loveliest girls that ever I set eyes on. Can you not get them married, Mrs. Dashwood?
If you cannot think of anything appropriate to say you will please restrict your remarks to the weather.
Ooh, a cottage! How charming. A little cottage is always very snug.
Perhaps Margaret is right. Piracy is our only option.
Is love a fancy or a feeling... or a Ferrars?
Mama,  there is a painful difference between the expectation of an unpleasant event and its final certainty.
Brandon is the sort of man everyone speaks well of, but no one remembers to talk to.
Always resignation and acceptance. Always prudence and honour and duty. Elinor, where is your heart?
John and ***** are in town. I think we shall be forced to see them.
Colonel Brandon?  Thank you.
You should have let me see her, Captain. We should have done this as men - not with fire.
Half of writing history is hiding the truth.
What're we expectin' to find here that equals the worth of a ****?
People don't like to be meddled with. We tell them what to do, what to think, don't run, don't walk. We're in their homes and in their heads and we haven't the right. We're meddlesome.
Run-tse duh shang-dee, ching dai-wuhtzo... make them stop! They're everywhere. Every city, every... every house, every room; they're all inside me! I can hear them all and they're saying... NOTHING! GET UP! Please, get up! Wuo-shang mayer, maysheen byen shr-to. Please God, make me a stone.
Doctor, I'm takin' your sister under my protection here. If anything happens to her, anything at all, I swear to you, I will get very choked up. Honestly, there could be tears.
Key members of Parliament. Key. The minds behind every military, diplomatic and covert operation in the galaxy, and you put them in a room with a psychic.
Ain't logical. Cuttin' on his own face, rapin' and murdering - ****, I'll kill a man in a fair fight... or if I think he's gonna start a fair fight, or if he bothers me, or if there's a woman, or if I'm gettin' paid - mostly only when I'm gettin' paid. But these Reavers... last ten years they show up like the bogeyman from stories. Eating people alive? Where's that get fun?
Target the Reavers. Target the Reavers! Target everyone! Somebody fire!
Boy, it sure would be nice if we had some grenades, don't you think?
This is the captain. We have a little problem with our entry sequence, so we may experience some slight turbulence and then - explode.
Love. You can learn all the math in the 'verse... but you take a boat in the air that you don't love... she'll shake you off just as sure as the turn of the worlds. Love keeps her in the air when she ought to fall down... tells you she's hurting before she keels. Makes her a home.
Eta Kooram Nah Smech!
Define "disappeared".
Can I make a suggestion that doesn't involve violence, or is this the wrong crowd for that?
These are just a few of the images we've recorded. And you can see, it wasn't what we thought. There's been no war here and no terraforming event. The environment is stable. It's the Pax. The G-23 Paxilon Hydrochlorate that we added to the air processors. It was supposed to calm the population, weed out aggression. Well, it works. The people here stopped fighting. And then they stopped everything else. They stopped going to work, they stopped breeding, talking, eating. There's 30 million people here, and they all just let themselves die.
Shiny. Let's be bad guys.
You can't stop the signal, Mal. Everything goes somewhere, and I go everywhere.
You take care of me, Simon. You've always taken care of me. My turn.
Dear Buddha, please bring me a pony and a plastic rocket...
I'm a hairsbreadth from riddlin' you with holes, Doctor!
When I talk about belief, why do you always assume I'm talking about God?
Do you know what the definition of a hero is? Someone who gets other people killed. You can look it up later.
Well, something sure the **** ain't right.
I am a leaf on the wind - watch how I soar.
Put a bullet to me. Bullet in the brain pan, squish.
The chicken's come home to roost.
I don't care what you believe in, just believe in it.
I've never credited the Alliance with an overabundance of brains and if you're the best they've got...
Officers, life doesn't have to be ugly. See, look at the birds out there. Listen to their call: "Oo-ee! Oo-ee! Oo-ee! Oo-ee! Oo-ee!"
Christ, that was Beaver Cleaver's mother.
I don't know what it is about today but I feel great. Cookie?
Serial mom! Serial mom! Serial mom! Serial mom!
Oh, kids, are you doing your homework?
You know, you're bigger than Freddy and Jason now, only you're a real person.
All units: Serial Mom is headed South on Ceswick. Proceed with caution. She is armed and ******' nuts!
I tell you right there I saw blood on the bottom of her shoes, not exactly blood, it was gore, hanging there like a runny nose.
Now I'll never get a boyfriend!
It's been a crazy day hasn't it?
The "Citizen Kane" of gore movies.
Hey, can I borrow your mother? My Aunt is coming for dinner and she's always getting on my nerves.
Well, Chip's off to a fine start this year.
Doctor Sutphin, is your wife mental?
I'm sorry. I'm your neighbor and my dog ran up on your ****... deck!
And we were dressed from head to toe in love... the only label that never goes out of style.
Charlotte has pudding in her Prada.
Your two best friends just got ******* over by their guys, how could you not be distant?
I thought I'd still be in extreme pain. But I feel nothing. I'd like some more nothing.
Yeah, it's all so hot three days in!
Just calling to make sure you aren't hanging from your shower rod.
Yes, the honeymoon to a romantic Mexican resort that I prepaid on my credit card to surprise the man who jilted me.
It's the last single girl kiss.
What does your gut tell you?
It wasn't logic, it was love.
Hey ****-wad, I'm speaking.
I'm gonna say the one thing you aren't supposed to say. I love you... but I love me more. I've been in a relationship with myself for 49 years and that's the one I need to work on.
Sweetie, you **** your pants this year. I think you're done.
You brought me back to life.
I feel the same way as you feel about Botox. Painful and unnecessary.
Oh, honey, you made a little joke. Good for you!
And there, in the same city where they met as girls, four New York women entered the next phase of their lives dressed head to toe in love. And that's the one label that never goes out of style.
Forty is the last age a woman can be photographed in a wedding dress without the unintended Diane Arbus subtext.
Some labels are best left in the closet.
It's my lot in life to be surrounded by beautiful women.
Is a relationship saying his name fifty times more a day than my own?
Year after year, twenty-something women come to New York City in search of the two L's: labels and love.
You two are crazy to get married. Marriage ruins everything.
Ever Thine, Ever Mine, Ever Ours.
I know, my head's in the Witness Protection Program.
I curse the day you were born!
You see? This is how it starts. Next thing you know, we're only having *** three or four times a week.
You know, I'd like to do it at your house sometime. I must admit, the idea of doing it in my sister's bed gives me a perverse thrill.
I think that um... I think that *** is overrated. I think that people place far too much importance on it, and I think that stuff about women wantin' it just as bad as men is ****. I mean I think that women want it, I just don't think that they want it for the same reason that men think they do.
Ann, I don't understand why this freaks you out so much. You didn't do it, I did. And if it doesn't bother me, why should it bother you?
I want out of this marriage.
I remember reading somewhere that men learn to love the person that they're attracted to, and that women become more and more attracted to the person that they love.
Have you ever been on television?
You never used to say the word "*******."
Fifty pounds! A very worthy sum on a very worthy question. Can a play show us the very truth and nature of love? I bear witness to the wager, and will be the judge of it as occasion arises. I have not seen anything to settle it yet.
A famous victory! Kegs and legs open, and on the house! Oh, what happy hour.
Good morning, my lord. I see you are open for business - so let's to church.
My lady, the tide waits for no man, but I swear it would wait for you.
You see - comedy. Love, and a bit with a dog. That's what they want.
This is not life, Will. It is a stolen season.
Well, that would have them rolling in the aisles.
You see? The comsumptives plot against me. "Will Shakespeare has a play, let us go and cough through it."
I love you, Will, beyond poetry.
Licentiousness is made a show! Vanity and pride are likewise made a show! This is the very business of show!
And tell Master Shakespeare, something more cheerful next time, for Twelfth Night.
I'm a dead man and buggered to boot!
Gentlemen upstage; ladies downstage... Are you a lady Mr. Kent?
You will never age for me, nor fade, nor die.
Mr. Tilney! Have a care with my name - you will wear it out!
I don't know. It's a mystery.
Let us have pirates, clowns, and a happy ending, or we shall send you back to Stratford to your wife!
The Master of the Revels despises us all for vagrants and peddlers of bombast. But my father, James Burbage, had the first license to make a company of players from Her Majesty, and he drew from poets the literature of the age. We must show them that we are men of parts. Will Shakespeare has a play. I have a theatre. The Curtain is yours.
Nurse, as I love you and you love me, you will bind my breast and buy me a boy's wig.
God, you two are sensitive! All I'm doing is implying some kind of ugly sordid sexual liaison. I'd be proud of that sort of thing.
Cameron, what a surprise!
When was the last time you heard these exact words: "You are the sunshine of my life"?
To love and to happiness forever.
When you get up in the morning, how do you decide what shade of black to wear?
Normally I don't usually meet people, unless I already know them.
Victory is the same as defeat. It's giving in to destructive competitive urges.
He even signs them, in his own name can you believe it? I'd sign someone else's name... I'd sign his name!... If I wrote them that is, which I don't.
And how would you react, then, if I told you I was the Antichrist?
So this affair you're not having - is it not with a man, or not with a woman?
I've never seen a dead body before. I saw my grandmother of course, but I don't think that counts. I mean, she was alive at the time.
Family? Family? Friends? Drugged-up wandering suicidal search of the self ****-ups don't have families.
C'mon, who's the greatest ********** in the whole world?
Never theorize before you have data. Invariably, you end up twisting facts to suit theories, instead of theories to suit facts.
How terrible is wisdom, when it brings no profit to the wise.
I wonder if they'd let Watson and me dissect your brain. After you hang, of course. I'd wager there would be some deformity that would be scientifically significant. In that way, at least, you could serve some kind of useful purpose.
It's a matter of professional integrity! No girl wants to marry a doctor who can't tell if a man's dead or not!
Data, data, data. I cannot make bricks without clay.
My mind rebels at stagnation! Give me problems! Give me work!
Eye patch... nice touch.
He was conceived during one of our rituals.
I see two men. Two men, like brothers, not in blood but in bond.
You have the grand gift of silence, Watson; it makes you quite invaluable as a companion.
Oh my god, character actors!
You're a dead-end, dead-beat, nowhere mister with a kisser like a Mississippi alligator's sister!
Alimony is just another word for RAPE.
Ladies and gentlemen: Denton's own, America's pride, the world's example: Janet, the sensation of the planet.
Time's tight, Janet. Do it right, Janet. Until tomorrow night, Janet?
Ever since I was the eine kleine herren/It was the Cordon Bleu for which I am most carin'/And the one taste treat so sweet, it really can't be beat/Is what we have, ja, how you are, caviar, that little black mess!
We lost our mom, we lost our dad, and if I'm losin' you well, that's... too bad!
The subject is committed. As are we all.
Like a virgin with an urgin' in a surgery, I'll be swinging, I'll be bringing out the nurse in me.
Ah, hello, Mr. and... Mrs. Majors. How wonderful to see you. I'm Dr. Cosmo McKinley, and this is my sister and... colleague... Dr. Nation McKinley.
I can't stand it! Everything good always happens to other people!
Hi, Brad. I've just come to tell you how fabulous I am.
Well...! First you go rip, rip, rip/Then you go snip, snip, snip/Then you whip in a zip, zip, zip/And split it up to the hip, hip, hip/And as you strip, strip, strip/You quiver and shiver for that soft caress/As you slip, slip, slip/Into that little black dress.
But the false promise of a new dawn usually leads to a most bloody sunset.
Dear blender/Now, won't you help a first offender?/Oh, toaster/Don't you put the burn on me/Refrigerator/Why are we always sooner or later/Bitchin' in the kitchen or cryin' in the bedroom all night?
If that's not enough, then I'm/So sorry I met you, it was almost like leading you on/But there's more to it all/Than just ringing your heart out over something/That keeps on going wrong/So don't tell me you love me/How am I supposed to know what that means?/No, don't sell emotion/You can't buy devotion if you're falling apart at the seams...
You'll find happy hearts, and smiling faces, and tolerance for, the ethnic races, in Denton.
You're blinded by romance, you're blinded by science. Your condition is critically grave, but don't expect mercy from such an alliance. Suspicion of tradition's so new wave.
First and foremost, Farley Flavors' fabulous fast foods feed and fortify families for a fabulous future.
Cheerleaders: They call us the goody goody two shoes/ We're here to cheer you with the good news/ That D-E-N-T-O-N gets T-E-N/ That's ten out of ten!
Macy Struthers with my husband. God, I must have been blind! Still, the weaker the man, the dumber the blonde.
Now, you see the way we got rid of that dirty little dish is the same way we're going to put the rest of our house in order! Including... the upstairs!
Night-night, it's time for bye-byes, it's been a great day, thanks a heap. Now it's time for everyone to go to sleep...
God bless us, everyone!
Donkey, two things okay? Shut... up!
Now really, it's rude enough being alive when no one wants you, but showing up uninvited to a wedding?
That's enough! He's ready to talk.
This cage is too small.
I live in a swamp! I put up signs! I'm a terrifying ogre! What do I have to do to get a little privacy?
That must be Lord Farquaad's castle... Do you think he's maybe compensating for something?
Blue flower, red thorns. Blue flower, red thorns. Blue flower, red thorns. Man, this would be so much easier if I wasn't COLOR-BLIND!
Hey, that's my princess! Go find your own!
Thank you, thank you very much. I'm here 'til Thursday. Try the veal.
Oh, that's funny. Oh. Oh. I can't breathe. I can't breathe.
All right, I hope you heard that? She called me a "noble steed." She thinks I'm a steed.
I'll find those stairs. I'll whip their butt, too. Those stairs won't know which way they're going... take drastic steps, kick it to the curb. Don't mess wit' me. I'm the Stair Master. I've mastered the stairs. I wish I had a step right here, right now, I'd step all over it...
Your flying days are over!
All right, nobody move! I've got a dragon and I'm not afraid to use it! I'm a donkey on the edge!
Princess Fiona... she's perfect!
The chair! Give him the chair!
We can stay up late, swapping manly stories, and in the morning, I'm making waffles!
That'll do, Donkey. That'll do.
Sure, it's big enough... but look at the location!
The winner of this tournament - no, no, the privilege - will have the honour of rescuing the beautiful Princess Fiona from the fiery pit of that dragon! Should the winner fail to return, the runner-up shall take his place, and so on and so forth... Some of you may die, but that is a sacrifice I am willing to make.
Consult your doctor before using this product. Side effects may include oily discharge, hives, loss of appetite, low blood pressure. If you have diabetes or a history of kidney trouble, you're dead, *******!
Bet ya that chick's two tons of fun. You know, the grateful type?
Did you drink and dial?
Quaffable, but uh... far from transcendent.
Listen, honey. Let me call you right back. Miles and I are in the middle of something. No, it's nothing serious, Miles is just having one of his freak-outs. Yeah. Love you too.
You know, the day you open a '61 Cheval Blanc... that's the special occasion.
Try to be your normal, humorous self. The guy you were before the tailspin. Do you remember that guy? People love that guy.
You don't understand my plight.
There he is. There's my boy. But who's your daddy? Who is yo' daddy?
You're getting *married* on Saturday?
There's a monster outside my room, can I have a glass of water?
I don't want any of you spending time with Tracy Abernathy alone. Understand?
It's not contaminated, you don't even know what that word means.
You're wasting your time here. I'm not going to report this or anything you do to my crops to the police or news or anybody. You're not going to get famous.
Looks a little like our house doesn't it?
One time, I was at this party... and I was sitting on the couch with Amanda McKinney. She was just sitting there, looking beautiful. So, I lean in to kiss her, and I realize I have gum in my mouth. So, I turn to spit it out and put it in a paper cup. I turn back, and Amanda McKinney throws up all over herself. I knew the moment it happened, it was a miracle. I could have been kissing her when she threw up. It would have scarred me for life. I may never have recovered.
Old Mrs. Kendleman twisted her ankle, as she puts it, diving for her life when a bunch of school kids rode down the sidewalk on skateboards. She went down to Thornton's store this morning and started spitting on the new skateboards. Spitting! By the time I got there, Mrs. Kendlemen had sprayed the whole **** place. And she must have had a cold or something. I'm telling you, I won't eat for a week. So, what happened to your crops?
Swing away Merrill. Merrill... swing away.
Don't open my pantry, Father. I found one of them in there and I locked him in.
It's like War of the Worlds.
See this is why we're not watching TV, people become obsessed.
You'll lose the signal.
There are a lot of things I can take, and some things I can't. But what I can't take is when my older brother, who's everything that I want to be, starts losing faith in things. I saw that look in your eyes last night. I don't ever want to see that look in your eyes again.
The book says they're probably very good problem solvers. They'll find a way in.
Closer, please. Clo-ser...
There are three major centers for transsexual surgery - Johns Hopkins, University of Minnesota, and Columbus Medical Center.
A census taker once tried to test me. I ate his liver with some fava beans and a nice chianti.
Advancement, of course. Listen carefully. Look deep within yourself, Clarice Starling. Go seek out Miss Mofet, an old patient of mine. M-o-f-e-t. Go now, I don't think Miggs could manage again quite so soon, even though he is crazy.  Go now!
Good evening, Clarice.
I am going to show you why we insist on such precautions. On the evening of July 8th, 1981, he complained of chest pains and was taken to the dispensary. His mouthpiece and restraints were removed for an EKG. When the nurse leaned over him, he did this to her.  The doctors managed to reset her jaw more or less. Saved one of her eyes. His pulse never got above 85, even when he ate her tongue.
You still think you're going to walk on some beach and see the birdies? I don't think so. I called Senator Ruth Martin. She never heard of any deal with you. They scammed you, Hannibal.
Do not touch the glass. Do not approach the glass. You pass him nothing but soft paper - no pencils or pens. No staples or paperclips in his paper. Use the sliding food carrier, no exceptions. If he attempts to pass you anything, do not accept it. Do you understand me?
Well, Clarice - have the lambs stopped screaming?
Look at it, Starling. Tell me what you see.
Ready when you are, Sergeant Pembry.
People will say we're in love.
I graduated from UVa, Captain; it's not exactly a charm school.
You know, we get a lot of detectives here, but I must say I can't ever remember one as attractive.
Welcome to Memphis Dr. Lecter, I'm Lieutenant Boyle, this is Sergeant Patrick. Now we'll treat you as good as you treat us, you be a gentleman and you'll get three hots and a cot.
Hester Mofet. It's an anagram, isn't it, Doctor? Hester Mofet, "The rest of me". "Miss the rest of me," meaning that you rented that garage?
YOU DON'T KNOW WHAT PAIN IS!
You're very frank, Clarice. I think it would be quite something to know you in private life.
Suicides go to ****. Especially if they're pregnant. And I don't even care.
**** cripples. Always ending up on welfare. I'd electrocute 'em all if there weren't so goddamn many.
I feel like a virgin on prom night.
I'm a little too old to be playing "Hardy Boys meet Reverend Werewolf"!
There are no such things as werewolves!
Mister, you got a lot to learn about people.
I want to build something. Make things grow. That takes hard work. A lifetime of it. That's not why a man comes to a pretty woman. After a while I won't be so pretty. But this land will be.
Excuse me, Sheriff, I'm a gambler who'd like to run an honest game in your town. To whom do I speak about that?  I hope it's not this gentleman.
I guess you couldn't hear us comin'.  He's practicin' so hard for a fight, he missed the whole thing.
The world is what you make of it, friend. If it doesn't fit, you make alterations.
Mind? You bring a posse to my best hideout and you ask me if I mind? Mister, I don't know any of those names. You're about to die.
You used to ride with that guy?
Now, I don't wanna kill you, and you don't wanna be dead.
I think there's only a couple of guys up there and this ******* is one of 'em.
Come on, boys! Jake's in town! Let's start the ball!
If I find any cattle on our land, I'm gonna start carvin' them into steaks. And believe me, that's one thing I know about.
Get Kyle and Dusty over here. And keep your eyes open! I'm runnin' out of deputies.
Calvin Stanhope. But my mother used to call me "Slick."
Brace yourself, sisters. Spread out and look for Mary Clarence. Try to blend in.
This is a sin, it's a wicked indulgence. Didn't they have any butter pecan?
What are you gonna do? Stick me in a bag and bury me? Forget it!
I was thinking "Vegas", you know, "Get some butts in the seats."
I was just yankin' your chain.
Well Daddy, it's harvest time.
Your destiny can be your doom. Look at me and my Rick.
A ho! A ho! My dad's been captured by a ho!
Sam... It's nice to meet you.
The horseman was a Hessian mercenary sent to the shores by German princes to keep Americans under the yoke of England. But unlike his compatriots, who came for money, the horseman came for love of carnage.
Reckon you make me some biscuits.
Yes, ma'am. I've killed Doyle Hargraves with a lawnmower blade. Yes, ma'am, I'm right sure of it. I hit him two good whacks in the head with it. That second one just plum near cut his head in two... It's a lil' ol' white house on the corner of Vine Street and some other street. There's a pick-up truck out front that says "Doyle Hargraves Construction" on it. Doyle said besides sending the police, you might wanna send an ambulance or a "hearst". I'll be sitting here, waiting on ye.
I like them French fried potaters.
There was a young man by the name of John Leggit Hunter who ran a filling station business, a good filling station business and he's one of these young men we all come across in life, I'm sure you've come across 'em, who did not deserve what he had and what he had was a beautiful young bride named Sarah. She was a Georgia peach. In fact, she was the picture I had in my mind of the perfect woman so I took it upon myself to take her away from John Leggit Hunter who did not deserve her. Oh, I don't know if I mentioned this but he was a Frenchman who claimed to be an Englishman. It took a lot of strong nylon cord to get her away from him because she was a fighter as well as being a Georgia peach.
There were these two fellars standin' on a bridge, a-goin' to the bathroom. One fellar said, "The water's cold" and the other fellar said, "The water's deep". I believe one fella come from Arkansas. Get it?
A shovel just makes too ********* much racket.
You gotta make something explode to really understand it. You gotta examine all those tiny particles while they're still on fire.
If y'all don't shut up, I'm gonna go out of my mind. Besides, Karl here is liable to bust his spring. He's already off balance.
Something's wrong with me.
Don't let them in your mouth!
Open the door, Jellybean
The little fuckers are tearing me apart!
Now, I don't care what kind of leprosy you got. We need to find that girl. Now, you can make this peaceful, or you can make it hard.
Grant looks like a squid, don't know where he's gonna hide... Seaworld maybe.
My enemy's enemy is a friend.
When somebody asks me a question, I tell them the answer.
Baali, keep up! The chaiwalah knows more than you.
Shut up! The man with the Colt 45 says shut up!
I thought we'd be together only in death.
Well, well. The Slumdog Barks.
The guide book was written by a bunch of lazy good-for-nothing Indian beggars!
Duck, or you're gonna be talkin' out yo ***!
Hoss, you ain't gonna believe this, but that cray sombitch just tried to drive right up under my truck!
My name is Vitolli, how can I be of assistance?
Don't worry, I forgive you Darwin.
The ho train has left the station.
Oh **** yeah, we was just at the wrong place at the wrong time, so don't feel so bad, chief.
You makin' a ***** fall hard, man...
Uh, no. No. That area is currently under construction.
You can keep the 10 grand, along with the body. But if I see you again - YOU MOTHERFUCKERS! - Well, look at him.
Are you taking the ****?
You aren't exactly Mister Current Affairs are you, Tommy? "Mad Fist" went mad, and "The Gun," shot himself.
I fail to recognize the correlation between losing ten grand, hospitalizing Gorgeous, and a good deal.
Heavy is good, heavy is reliable. If it doesn't work you can always hit them with it.
You ******* idiots. He could not know my name.
I'm driving down the road with your head stuck in my window. What does it look like I'm doin'?
Well, why didn't you just  "bust a cap in his ***," Tommy?
Wow! That's a great load off me mind. Now, if you wouldn't mind telling me who the **** you are, apart from someone who feeds people to pigs of course!
It's an unlicensed boxing match. It's not a tickling competition. These lads are out to hurt each other.
Lighten up, Charlie. You've got a pickle up your *** again.
Alright, give your mother a kiss, or I'll kick your teeth in.
Fine. Go. You've stayed your hour.
You know, Scotland has its own martial arts. Yeah, it's called **** You. It's mostly just head butting and then kicking people when they're on the ground.
We take off into the cosmos, ready for anything - - solitude, hardship, exhaustion, death. We're proud of outselves. But when you think about it, our enthusiasm's a sham. We don't want other worlds; we want mirrors.
Will you look at that! Look how she moves! It's like Jell-O on springs. Must have some sort of built-in motor or something. I tell you, it's a whole different ***!
Real diamonds! They must be worth their weight in gold!
How about the shape of that liquor cabinet?
So you got pinched in the elevator, so what? Would you rather be picking lead out of your navel?
I don't care how rich he is, as long as he has a yacht, his own private railroad car, and his own toothpaste.
Thank you, fellow opera-lovers. It's been ten years since I elected myself president of dis organization... an' if I say so myself, you made duh right choice. Let's look at duh record: In duh lass fissel year we made a hundred an' twelve million dollars before taxes... only we ain't paying no taxes!
Where did you pick up that cheap trick?
All right, driver, once around the park, slowly, and keep your eyes on the road.
Let me watch over *you* tonight.
Erica, you are a woman to love.
Must we go through this every time? Come here.
Harry, your heart attack could be the best thing that's ever happened to me!
I'm like the dumb girl that doesn't get it. I've never been the dumb girl before. It ain't so great.
I got you something GREAT at the farmstand...
Schmucks are people too.
These are for you to give me when you apologize.
How great is it for you that im not intimidated by your brilliance?
I'm going to pluck you up!
Ow! That Hurt, you butt licker!
Dammit! It never gets any easier!
Wow, I guess you can light a **** on fire, huh?
We accidentally replaced your heart with a baked potato. You have about three seconds to live.
Bombs are flying, people are dying, children are crying, politicians are lying too. Cancer is killing, Texaco's spilling, the whole world's gone to ****, but how are you?
I once ****** on the set of Blue Lagoon.
Shut of ze power Cartman, zis is very important Cartman.
I can't wait to take leave so I can get me some ******* poontang.
Ya like that, don't ya, *****?
And I don't know what I've been told / Canadian ***** is mighty cold.
All right, now let's trying to get an answer from someone who's not a complete ******?
This little ******* sucker deceived us.
**** Gregory. **** him right in the ear!
There are some mistakes you cannot risk when you have children.
I couldn't hear you. There was a crack in the planet. WOW... that was noisy!
Flor! Look at this child! You could make a fortune doing surrogate pregnancy!
Lately, your low self-esteem is just good common sense.
Don't translate asides.
Maybe Royalton is right. Maybe racing really is all about the business, and anyone who doesn't understand that is just a chump.
God, you sound like Rex! You wanna die like him, too? Will that make you happy?
This isn't a race; it's a showdown.
I finally understand it now, Trix. I know why he left us. He was trying to change this rotten business and they killed him for it.
Racing's in our blood. Like for Pops, it isn't just a sport. It's way more important than that. It's like a religion. And in our house, the major sponsors are kind of like the devil. I don't mean to offend you, sir, and I do appreciate your offer, but after all we've been through, I don't think this kind of deal is for me.
Ok, Mr. 2-time-Grand-Prix-5-time-WRL-future-Hall-of-Fame... teach me something.
Folks, I knew Rex Racer and if he's up there somewhere watching this race, you can bet your *** he's **** proud of his little brother.
Stop steering and start driving. This ain't no dead piece of metal. A car's a living, breathing thing, and she's alive. Feel it talking to you. Telling you what she wants, what she needs. All you gotta do is listen. Close your eyes and listen.
Don't take it out on me because you feel guilty about what happened to Rex!
I know he blew up at Fuji, but this kid is flat out magic!
Speed Racer, slow down!
Interesting that you and your father were so moved by the '43 Prix. One of the great finishes in the history of racing, right? Everyone remembers Burns and Stickleton slugging it out. But who remembers Carl Potts? Driving this rebuilt Wittigan for lodyne Industries, Potts spun out in the second lap and went down as a DNF, a forgettable and pathetic finish, so bad that afterwards, lodyne stock dropped six points. But as Ben Burns sat guzzling cold, fresh milk in Victory Lane, a thousand cameras taking his picture, Sirrus Aeronautics saw almost a 12-point gain, which immediately blocked Penninsula Power Cell from being able to afford the price of a complete takeover. This put Joel Goldman, the CEO of lodyne, Inc., in the exact position he wanted to be in. By first buying controlling interest in his own company at a devalued price, he then brokered a merger with Sirrus that immediately sent lodyne into the gains record book, the only record book that matters. Look out that window. There isn't a single plane or helicopter or K-Harrier that isn't powered by lodyne fuel cells. That's what racing is about. It has nothing to do with cars or drivers. All that matters is power, and the unassailable might of money!
Do I get to say thank you this time?
Whatever life holds in store for me, I will never forget these words: "With great power comes great responsibility." This is my gift, my curse. Who am I? I'm Spider-man.
All right then, gentlemen, we are all friends again. And with Christmas coming on I have a special treat for you. I'll have you all deloused for the holidays and I'll have a little Christmas tree for every barrack. You will like that.
It's no use, Schulz, you might as well come clean. Why don't you just tell them it's me, because I'm really the illegitimate son of Hitler, and after the Germans win the war, you're going to make me the Gauleiter of Zinzinnati!
What's the matter with you, Security? You were always so calm. Especially when you let Manfredi and Johnson go out there.
You got yourselves the wrong guy. Because I'm tellin ya the Krauts wouldn't plant two stoolies in one barracks. And whatever you do to me, you'll have to do all over again when you find the right guy!
If I ever run into any of you bums on a street corner, just let's pretend we've never met before.
I believe it. My wife says, "Darling, you won't believe it, but I found the most adorable baby on our doorstep and I've decided to keep it for our very own. Now you won't believe it, but it's got exactly my eyes and nose." Why does she keep saying I won't believe it? I believe it! I believe it.
Bah! One Fuhrer is enough!
Curtains would do wonders for this barracks. You will not get them.
I've never beamed three people from two targets onto one pad before! I thought that was pretty good!
I don't feel right. I feel like I'm leaking!
I like this ship! You know, it's exciting!
Ensign Authorization code: nine-five-wictor-wictor-two!
4 years? I'll do it in three.
Captain's log, Stardate: two two five eight point four two... four... uh, whatever. Acting Captain Spock has marooned me on Delta Vega, in what I believe is a violation of Security Protocol 49.09 governing the treatment of prisoners on-board a starship.
You will always be a child of two worlds. I am grateful for this, and for you.
It appears that you have been keeping important information from me...
Space: the final frontier. These are the voyages of the starship Enterprise. Her ongoing mission: to explore strange new worlds, to seek out new life-forms and new civilizations; to boldly go where no one has gone before.
Once you have eliminated the impossible, whatever remains, however improbable, must be the truth.
Kirk, you're coming too, you're not supposed to be here anyway...
I can't wait to kick some Romulan ****!
Mr. Chekov, set a course... for home.
You are an imperfect being, created by an imperfect being. Finding your weakness is only a matter of time.
Brave words. I've heard them before, from thousands of species across thousands of worlds, since long before you were created. But, now they are all Borg.
I am the beginning. The end. The one who is many. I am the Borg.
I hope, for your sake, that you were initiating a mating ritual.
Who am I to argue with the captain of the Enterprise?
Ugh! Human females are so repulsive.
Now, if you'll have to excuse me, Captain. I have an appointment with eternity and I don't want to be late.
Least I could do for the captain of the enterprise.
Risk is part of the game if you want to sit in that chair.
Open sesame! You could say I have a magnetic personality.
Jim. Your name... is Jim.
DON'T call me "Tiny."
How many have paid the price for your impatience? How many have died? How much damage have you done, and what is yet to come?
If he thinks he can get away with warp drive... he's in for a shock.  Prepare for warp speed stand by transwarp drive!
The needs of the one outweighed the needs of the many.
Klingon *******! You killed my son!
What does it mean, "exact change"?
Everybody remember where we parked.
Oh, him? He's harmless. Part of the free speech movement at Berkeley in the sixties. I think he did a little too much LDS.
It is difficult to answer, when one does not understand the question.
Maybe he's singing to that man.
May fortune favor the foolish.
Hello, Alice. Welcome to "Wonderland".
I'm ready, Spock! Let's go find George and Gracie!
Admiral, there be whales here!
Admiral, if we were to assume these whales were ours to do with as we pleased, we would be as guilty as those who caused their extinction.
Our mission? Spock, you're talking about the end of every life on Earth! You're half human.  Haven't you got any goddamn feelings about THAT?
This is an extremely primitive and paranoid culture.
Are you sure it isn't time for a colorful metaphor?
I am Pavel Chekov, a commander in Starfleet. United Federation of Planets Service Number 656-5827D.
To absent friends... To family.
Come to dinner, tomorrow on Romulus. Just the two of us. Or should I say... just the one of us?
Captain's personal log, supplemental. We're heading toward Federation space at maximum warp. The crew has responded with the dedication I've come to expect of them. And like a thousand other commanders on a thousand other battlefields, I wait for the dawn.
You have the bridge... Mr. Troi.
Eventually I was treated, and now I can hear as well as you can, Captain. I can see as well as you can. I can feel everything you feel. In fact... I feel *exactly* what you feel. Don't I, Jean-Luc?
I'm trying to believe you, Shinzon. If there is one ideal that the Federation holds most dear, it is that all men, all races can be united. What better example? A Starfleet captain, standing in the Romulan Senate. Nothing would make me more proud than to take your hand in friendship - in time... when that trust has been earned.
You're too slow, old man.
For now we see but through a glass darkly.
I will always be puzzled by the human predilection for piloting vehicles at unsafe velocities.
Ladies and gentlemen, and invited transgendered species...
I'm glad we're together now. Our destiny's complete.
I'll show you my true nature - *our* nature. And as Earth dies, remember, I will always, forever, be Shinzon of Remus. And my voice shall echo through time long after yours has faded to a dim memory!
I'm with you, Imzadi. I'll always be with you now!
Can you learn to see in the dark, Captain?
You know, all things considered, Data, I think you have nicer eyes.
I think it's time to try some unsafe velocities.
Some ideals are worth dying for, aren't they, Jean-Luc?
Why do you have a shiny head?
My oath of celibacy is on record, Captain.
**** it, Bones, I need you. Badly!
Enterprise, what we got back didn't live long... fortunately.
Each of us... at some time in our lives, turns to someone - a father, a brother, a God... and asks..."Why am I here? What was I meant to be?"
Jim... This... simple feeling is beyond V'ger's comprehension.
We all create God in our own image.
**** it, Bones, you're a doctor. You know that pain and guilt can't be taken away with a wave of a magic wand. They're the things we carry with us, the things that make us who we are. If we lose them, we lose ourselves. I don't want my pain taken away! I need my pain!
I've always known I'll die alone.
USS Enterprise, shakedown crew's report. I think this new ship was put together by monkeys. Oh, she's got a fine engine, but half the doors won't open, and guess whose job it is to make it right.
Excuse me... Excuse me... I just wanted to ask a question. What does God need with a starship?
Please Captain, not in front of the Klingons.
Why does God need a starship?
Well, don't just stand there. God's a busy man!
The people of your world once believed the world was flat. Columbus proved it was round. They said the sound barrier could never be broken!... It was broken. They said warp-speed could not be accomplished.
Is it possible that we two, you and I, have grown so old and so inflexible that we have outlived our usefulness?
You have not experienced Shakespeare until you have read him in the original Klingon.
Don't tell me that was any meteor shower!
Well... I see we have a long way to go.
Send to Commander Enterprise: "We stand ready to assist you" - Captain Sulu USS Excelsior.
Nice to see you in action for one last time, Captain Kirk. Take care.
Ahh... parting is such sweet sorrow. Don't we hear the chimes at midnight?
I'm going to sleep this off. Please let me know if there's some other way we can ***** up tonight.
Mr. President, they are vulnerable... there will never be a better time.
There is an old Vulcan proverb: only Nixon could go to China.
Indeed. The record shows that Captain Kirk once held the rank of Admiral. And that Admiral Kirk was broken for taking matters into his own hands in defiance of regulations of the law. Do you deny being demoted for these charges? DON'T WAIT FOR THE TRANSLATION. Answer me now.
That Klingon ***** killed her father.
You're a great one for logic. I'm a great one for rushing in where angels fear to tread. We are both extremists. Reality has brought us somewhere in-between.
Why, that cunning little Vulcan!
Bet you wished you'd stood in bed!
Guess who's coming to dinner.
You don't trust me, do you? I don't blame you. If there is to be a brave new world, our generation is going to have the hardest time living in it.
Captain's Log, stardate 9529.1. This is the final cruise of the Starship Enterprise under my command. This ship and her history will shortly become the care of another crew. To them and their posterity will we commit our future. They will continue the voyages we have begun, and journey to all the undiscovered countries, boldly going where no man... where no *one* has gone before.
In the event of a water landing, I have been designed to act as a flotation device.
Definitely feeling aggressive tendency, sir!
I'm going to miss these flesh-stretching sessions, my dear.
If a court-martial is the only way to tell the Federation what is happening here, Admiral... I welcome it.
I kiss you and you say "yuck"?
Will, Geordi: go back and put a face on what's happening here. Make the council see the Baku. It's too easy to turn a blind eye to the suffering of a people you don't know.
Klingons never do anything small, do you?
I'm not letting go of him!
Smooth as an android's bottom.
Straighten your baldric.
I seem to be missing several memory engrams.  There they are.
I should warn you - I've always been attracted to older women.
Admiral Dougherty will not be joining us for dinner. Activate the collector.
There she is! There she is! Ah... not so wounded as we were led to believe. So much the better!
Captain Kirk was your host. You repaid his hospitality by trying to steal his ship and murder him!
To the last, I will grapple with thee... from Hell's heart, I stab at thee! For hate's sake, I spit my last breath at thee!
Every time we have dealings with Starfleet, I get nervous.
Are you out of your Vulcan mind?
Surely, I have made my meaning plain. I mean to avenge myself upon you, Admiral. I deprived your ship of power, and when I swing around, I mean to deprive you of your life.
**** it Jim, what the **** is the matter with you? Other people have birthdays, why are we treating yours like a funeral?
He is intelligent, but not experienced. His pattern indicates two-dimensional thinking.
We are gathered here today to pay final respects to our honored dead. But it should be noted that this death takes place in the shadow of new life, the sunrise of a new world; a world that our beloved comrade gave his life to protect and nourish. He did not feel this sacrifice a vain or empty one, and we will not debate his profound wisdom at these proceedings. Of my friend, I can only say this: of all the souls I have encountered in my travels, his was the most... human.
I'll give him this: he's consistent!
The energizer's bypassed like a Christmas tree, so don't give me too many bumps.
You proceed from a false assumption. I am a Vulcan. I have no ego to bruise.
Scotty, I need warp speed in three minutes or we're all dead!
Who's been holding up the **** elevator?
Space: the final frontier. These are the continuing voyages of the starship Enterprise. Her ongoing mission: to explore strange new worlds, to seek out new life forms and new civilizations, to boldly go where no man has gone before.
For over a thousand generations, the Jedi knights were the guardians of peace and justice in the old Republic... before the dark times... before the empire.
And I am C-3PO, human-cyborg relations. And this is my counterpart R2D2.
The Force is what gives a Jedi his power. It's an energy field created by all living things. It surrounds us and penetrates us. It binds the galaxy together.
In my experience, there's no such thing as luck.
Get in there, you big furry oaf! I don't care what you smell!
Aren't you a little short for a stormtrooper?
I have a very bad feeling about this.
Alright, come on. And the red one. Come on. Well, come on Red, let's go.
Someone has to save our skins. Into the garbage chute, fly boy.
Now don't you forget this! Why I should stick my neck out for you is far beyond my capacity!
That malfunctioning little twirp, this is all his fault.
You came in that thing? You're braver than I thought.
Don't call me a mindless philosopher, you overweight glob of grease.
Hello there.  Come here, my little friend. Don't be afraid.  Oh don't worry, he'll be alright.
This will be a day long remembered. It has seen the end of Kenobi, it will soon see the end of the Rebellion.
Great shot, kid, that was one in a million!
Well, you can forget your troubles with those Imperial slugs. I told you I'd outrun 'em.  Don't everyone thank me at once.
And now, your highness, we will discuss the location of your hidden rebel base...
Help! I think I'm melting! This is all your fault!
Hokey religions and ancient weapons are no match for a good blaster at your side, kid.
He says he's found the main control to the power beam that's holding the ship here; he'll try to make the precise location appear on the monitor.  The tractor beam is coupled to the main reactor in seven locations. A power loss at one of the terminals will allow the ship to leave.
Several fighters have broken off from the main group. Come with me!
The Force will be with you, always.
Help me, Obi-Wan Kenobi; you're my only hope.
If there's a bright center to the universe, you're on the planet that it's farthest from.
I felt a great disturbance in the Force, as if millions of voices suddenly cried out in terror and were suddenly silenced. I fear something terrible has happened.
Wonderful girl. Either I'm going to kill her or I'm beginning to like her.
Did you hear that? They shut down the main reactor. We'll be destroyed for sure. This is madness.
One thing's for sure, we're all gonna be a lot thinner.
I knew there was more to you than money!
Good against remotes is one thing. Good against the living, that's something else.
Just you reconsider playing that message for him!  No, I don't think he likes you at all.  No, I don't like you either.
The Force is strong with this one.
Mos Eisley spaceport: You will never find a more wretched hive of scum and villainy. We must be cautious.
There'll be no escape for the princess this time.
I don't know who you are or where you came from, but from now on you'll do as I tell you, okay?
Sure hope the old man got that tractor beam out of commission, or this is gonna be a real short trip. Okay, hit it!
That's no moon. It's a space station.
Where are you taking this... thing?
Your eyes can deceive you; don't trust them.
I sense something; a presence I've not felt since...
Boba Fett? Boba Fett? Where?
I'm rather embarrassed, General Solo, but it appears that you are to be the main course at a banquet in my honor.
Split up and head back to the surface. And see if you can get a few of those TIE fighters to follow you.
I have a really bad feeling about this.
Command station, this is ST321, code clearance blue. We're starting our approach; deactivate the security shield.
I see you have constructed a new light saber. Your skills are complete. Indeed you are powerful as the Emperor has foreseen.
Remember, a Jedi's strength flows from the Force. But beware. Anger, fear, aggression. The dark side are they. Once you start down the dark path, forever will it dominate your destiny. Luke... Luke... do not... do not underestimate the powers of the Emperor or suffer your father's fate you will. Luke, when gone am I... the last of the Jedi will you be. Luke, the Force runs strong in your family. Pass on what you have learned, Luke. There is... another... Sky... walker.
That blast came from the Death Star! That thing's operational!
General, count me in.
What could possibly have come over Master Luke? Is it something I did? He never expressed any unhappiness with my work.
I have decided that we shall stay here.
Don't worry, my friend's down there. He'll have that shield down in time.  Or this'll be the shortest offensive of all time.
If I told you half the things I've heard about this Jabba the Hutt, you'd probably short circuit.
It's over, Commander. The rebels have been routed and they're fleeing into the woods. We need reinforcements to continue the pursuit.
I have my orders from the Emperor himself. He has something special planned for them. We only need to keep them from escaping.
The alliance... will die. As will your friends. Good, I can feel your anger. I am defenseless. Take your weapon. Strike me down with all of your hatred and your journey towards the dark side will be complete!
You can see here, the Death Star orbiting the forest moon of Endor. Although, the weapon systems on this Death Star or not yet operational, the Death Star does have a strong defense mechanism. It is protected by an energy shield which is generated from the nearby forest moon of Endor.  The sheild must be deactivated, if any attack is to be attempted.  Once the shield is down, our cruisers will create a perimeter, while our fighters fly into the superstructure and attempt to knock out the main reactor.
Obi-Wan has taught you well.
Wait, I know that laugh...
The Emperor's made a critical error, and the time for our attack has come.
And now, young Skywalker... you will die.
Exciting is hardly the word I would choose.
I gave you a baby tonight.
I expect the best and I give the best. Here's the beer. Here's the entertainment. Now have fun. That's an order!
I need a corporal. You're it, until you're dead or I find someone better.
This is for all you new people: I only have one rule. Everyone fights. No one quits. You don't do your job, I'll shoot you myself. You get me?
Join the Mobile Infantry and save the Galaxy. Service guarantees citizenship. Would you like to know more?
Anytime you think I'm being too rough, anytime you think I'm being too tough, anytime you miss-your-mommy, QUIT! You sign your 1248, you get your gear, and you take a stroll down washout lane. Do you get me?
The only good bug is a dead bug.
Ain't it great how they want to be your friend right after they rip your guts out?
You're some sort of big, fat, smart-bug, aren't you?
I'm from Buenos Aires, and I say kill 'em all!
This is what my people died for... the right to make a movie in this town.
No, Henry James was the novelist, Frank James was the criminal. Yup, you came to the right place. Jesse James was the brother.... Of the novelist. That's right, Susie. See you tomorrow, Susie.
Everybody makes their own fun. If you don't make it yourself, it isn't fun. It's entertainment.
You know what you got there? You got a fishhook in your finger. I'm right proud of you.
It's not a lie. It's a gift for fiction.
Who designed these costumes? It looks like Edith Head puked, and that puke designed these costumes.
It's the truth that you should never trust anybody who wears a bow tie. Cravat's supposed to point down to accentuate the genitals. Why'd you wanna trust somebody whose tie points out to accentuate his ears?
If your memory was as long as your ****, you'd be in good shape.
Only second chance I know, is the chance to make the same mistake twice.
Everybody needs a hobby.
What is it that your worried about, looking bad at the P.T.A?
I'm sorry you're sick.
Just because you can't see something, doesn't mean it isn't there.
Look what I'm not cleaning up.
Don't be afraid of it, Daddy.
Why don't you just lick 'em when they walk by?
I don't know about what happened... because once you start writing, it ALL becomes fiction.
I'm not an idiot man. I watch TV.
I can use this, it's not bad, but, listen honey, you've got to move your eyes slower next time, much much slower. Like... like you're making love with your eyes, ok?
This tie cost more than your entire wardrobe... it's the one thing that stands between me and the jungle.
This is what we laughingly refer to as a plan, right?
The issue isn't whether you're paranoid, but whether you're paranoid enough.
Well, I've lost my appetite.  For about a year.
Paranoia is just reality on a finer scale.
Look... everyone needs to take a walk to the dark end of the street sometimes, it's what we are.
The only time a ***** should open her mouth is when she is giving head.
You're gonna be in my next song. It's called "RoboSteckler." It's about a cop who met his worst nightmare: a ***** with enough political juice to squash your *** like a stinkbug! You gonna be famous, ******!
When I met Faith, she was just another runaway, giving twenty dollar blowjobs to buy crack. Just another lost soul. But she had this voice... it was scary, like she could take all the hurt and rage of the entire world and lift it up to Heaven in one voice. I helped her. And I promised her I'd always just be there, to protect her. See, it's not about what's in her head, it's what's in mine. I can't let go of the promise. It's like it's all I have left.
You know one of the ways movies are still better than playback? The music comes up, there's credits, and you always know when it's over.  IT'S OVER!
Oooh... a little B&E action.
Memories are meant to fade. They're designed that way for a reason.
You put that thing on the 11 o'clock news and by midnight you'll have the biggest riot in history. They'll see the smoke from Canada.
Jesus Lenny, you scared the **** out of me!
Oh, Daddy doesn't mind a little scandal. He's a senator.
Everyone has somebody that they want to put out of the way. Oh now surely, Madam, you're not going to tell me that there hasn't been a time that you didn't want to dispose of someone. Your husband, for instance?
I may be old-fashioned, but I thought murder was against the law.
Don't worry, I'm not going to shoot you, Mr. Haines. It might disturb Mother.
I admire people who do things.
Doesn't that bloodhound ever relax? He sticks so close he's beginning to grow on me - like a fungus.
I still think it would be wonderful to have a man love you so much he'd kill for you.
Anything is possible. It is night on planet earth and I'm alive. And someday I'll be dead. Someday I'll just be bones in a box, but right now, I'm not. And anything is possible. And that's why I can go to New York with Sooze because each moment can just be what it is. There's no failure, there's no mistake. I just, I just go there and live there and what happens, happens. And so, right now I'm getting naked and I'm not afraid. You know? I don't, I don't need money, man. I don't, I don't even need, I don't even need a future. I, I could knock out all of my teeth with a hammer. So what? You know, I could poke my eyes out. I'd still be alive, you know? At least I'd know that I was doing something real for two or three seconds, you know? It's all about feat and I'm not afraid anymore, man. **** it! **** fear!
At least I admit that I don't know. I know that things are ****** up, beyond belief, and I have nothing original to say about it...
I expanded my horizons, you know, served my country, saw the world, you know. I've gained wisdom and now I'm back, baby, back from the road, me and Jack Kerouac.
Idealism is guilty middle-class ********.
No drinking. No cervezas in the casa. No chicas in the bedroom.
She's been the weak *** on this mama cat ever since this whole thing started!
Jack Bartlett. Jack Bartlett! Jack Bartlett. Is Jack Bartlett interested in me?
I feel totally abandon in a place that values physical prowess over mental acuity. I can't wait until all of that changes in the real world.
Then, there's Hannah Wald. She's this uber-Christian, doesn't really say much. In fact, if she wasn't kinda pretty, you'd say ''Hey, who's the 'tard?''
If the O.J. trial taught us anything, it taught us that, in America, you can cut somebody's head off and still be innocent as long as you have enough money. Well Kansas your mom only shoot a guy.
Did you say you are pregnant or you were pregnant. You had it, threw it out, and now you're gonna go dance all night?
Yeah? Well, how would you like me to introduce my foot into your ***!
Morning sunshine, remember, these are the best days of your life so far. .
The stars are ageless, aren't they?
There once was a time in this business when I had the eyes of the whole world! But that wasn't good enough for them, oh no! They had to have the ears of the whole world too. So they opened their big mouths and out came talk. Talk! TALK!
She was the greatest of them all. You wouldn't know, you're too young. In one week she received 17,000 fan letters. Men bribed her hairdresser to get a lock of her hair. There was a maharajah who came all the way from India to beg one of her silk stockings. Later he strangled himself with it!
Norma, you're a woman of 50, now grow up. There's nothing tragic about being 50, not unless you try to be 25.
As long as the lady is paying for it, why not take the Vicuna?
Oh, wake up, Norma, you'd be killing yourself to an empty house. The audience left twenty years ago.
I'd like the coffin to be white, and I want it specially lined with satin. White... or pink. Maybe red! Bright flaming red! Let's make it ***!
No-one ever leaves a star. That's what makes one a star.
We're gonna make a money pool, cause it's the smart way. It's capital, you don't spend it, you invest it. So that way we can get to do SP-250, and with money left over.
It's a business lie, it's different from a life lie.
There's not a lot that I am good at. But I'm good at getting guys to want me. Not date me, or marry me, but want me.
Holy ****! Fogell's a badass!
Calm down, calm down. She likes you. She wants to suck on your *****. That's a good thing. It's the best.
I'm sorry that I blocked your ****...
I don't understand why you have to be such a little ***** about it.
Good ****, right Miroki?
Next time, remind me to do this outside.
Hi there. Something wrong with the elevator?
Why is it I can't get it on with the good guys?
You were great in your day, Superman. But it just stands to reason, when it came time to cash in your chips, this old... diseased... maniac would be your banker.
I wonder what they're wearing in Addis Ababa?
All those things I can do. All those powers. And I couldn't even save him.
Some people can read War and Peace and come away thinking it's a simple adventure story. Others can read the ingredients on a chewing gum wrapper and unlock the secrets of the universe.
There's a strong streak of good in you, Superman. But then nobody's perfect... almost nobody.
The vote must be unanimous, Jor-El. It has therefore now become your decision. You alone will condemn us if you wish, and you alone will be held responsible by me.
Lex, my mother lives in Hackensack.
You will travel far, my little Kal-El. But we will never leave you... even in the face of our death. The richness of our lives shall be yours. All that I have, all that I've learned, everything I feel... all this, and more, I... I bequeath you, my son. You will carry me inside you, all the days of your life. You will make my strength your own, and see my life through your eyes, as your life will be seen through mine. The son becomes the father, and the father the son. This is all I... all I can send you, Kal-El.
This is Lex Luthor. Only one thing alive with less than four legs can hear this frequency, Superman, and that's you.
Do you know why the number two hundred is so vitally descriptive to both you and me? It's your weight and my I.Q.
It's kryptonite, Superman. Little souvenir from the old home town. I spared no expense to make you feel right at home.
It's amazing that brain can generate enough power to keep those legs moving.
Superman! Thank God!  I mean, get him!
... Frankly, I think this place is a bit boring. I mean, it's all WHITE! Why doesn't this Superman guy put up some nice posters here... Maybe some bullfighting stuff, or a pool table...!
And now... finally. Take my hand and swear eternal loyalty to Zod.
Computers rule the world today. And the fellow that can fool the computers, can rule the world himself.
I ask you to kill Superman, and you're telling me you couldn't even do that one, simple thing.
Vera, get ahold of yourself. No one else ever will.
How can he say that Pure Categories have no objective meaning in Transcendental Logic? What about Synthetic Unity?
You know a wise man once said, I think it was Attila the Hun, "It is not enough that I succeed, everyone else must fail."
You never could hit a curve ball!
The Dude of Steel! Boy are you gonna get it!
Uh... no pain, no gain?
Lenny, I've always considered you the Dutch Elm disease in my family tree.
I'd want to tell him that I cherished the time we spent together, and I never expected anything from him. Even if I only saw him for a few moments, it made me happy. And I'd want to tell him that I love him and that I'll always love him. And... no matter what happens on this world, I know he tried his best to help us.
This is my nephew Lenny. He worships me.
Goodnight, sweet prince. Parting is... inevitable.
I know what you're thinking. "Pain is coming. Will I take it like a man?" Well, let me put you at ease. You won't. None of them do. Men, women, children, they all weep, they all beg, they **** themselves, they attempt negotiation. You wouldn't believe how many men I've seen lying right where you're lying right now, grown men with wives amd children at home, offering all kinds of sexual gratification for a five-minute reprieve. It's pathetic!
Maybe I left my sense of humor in my other suit.
I like Harry, but I can't deny he sweats a little.
Mr. Hunsecker, you've got more twists than a barrel of pretzels!
Watch me run a 50-yard dash with my legs cut off!
Don't remove the gangplank, Sidney - you may wanna get back onboard.
That's fish four days old. I won't buy it!
President? My big toe would make a better President!
If you're funny, Walter, I'm a pretzel! Drop dead!
You're dead, son. Get yourself buried.
Tell me sir, when he dies, do you think he'll go to the dog and cat heaven?
Here's mud in your column!
I'd hate to take a bite outta you. You're a cookie full of arsenic.
Kill me, push me through a window somewhere! I walked into this hallowed ground without knocking!
Everybody knows Manny Davis - except Mrs. Manny Davis.
Who could love a man who makes you jump into hoops like a trained poodle?
Now don't kid a kidder.
I love this dirty town.
The next time you want information, don't scratch for it like a dog, ask for it like a man!
Son, I don't relish shooting a mosquito with an elephant gun, so why don't you just shuffle along?
Sidney, conjugate me a verb. For instance, "to promise."
Sidney, this syrup you're giving out with... you pour over waffles, not J.J. Hunsecker.
It's a dirty job, but I pay clean money for it.
Don't you get messages, Eyelashes? I called you twice.
Don't do anything I wouldn't do! That gives you a lot of leeway...
Come back, Sidney... I wanna chastise you...
Harvey, I often wish I were dead and wore a hearing aid. With a simple flick of a switch, I could shut out the greedy murmur of little men.
What you do now, Mr. Falco, is crow like a hen. You have just laid an egg.
So let me get this straight. The party started at eight. Why are we going to a bar at ten?
You take yourself out of the game, you start talking about puppy dogs and ice cream and of course it's going to end up on the friendship tip.
They went with someone who had more theme-park experience.
Trent, the beautiful babies don't work the midnight to six shift on a Wednesday. This is like the ***** shift.
That was so ******* money. That was like the Jedi mind-****.
Haven't you seen Boyz N The Hood? Now one of us is going to get shot.
This place is dead anyways.
You're so money and you don't even know it!
For someone the NSA once listed as the most dangerous hacker in America, you sure don't look like much.
You know what the problem with Hollywood is? They make ****.
Too Bad ! You are gonna die !
Surprised that a girl with an IQ over seventy can give you a hard on?
I have been told that the best crackers in the world can do this under 60 minutes but unfortunately I need someone who can do this under 60 seconds.
I don't think you should tell her she doesn't have blood...
I know how to do it now. There are nearly thirteen million people in the world. None of those people is an extra. They're all the leads of their own stories. They have to be given their due.
Hazel, you've been a part of me forever. Don't you know that? I breathe your name in every exhalation.
I know how to do the play now. It will all take place over the course of one day. And that day will be the day before you died. That day was the happiest day of my life. Then I'll be able to live it forever. See you soon.
Try to keep in mind that a young person playing Willie Loman thinks he's only pretending to be at the end of a life full of despair. But the tragedy is that we know that you, the young actor will end up in this very place of desolation.
Glad to be weirdly close.
Everything is more complicated than you think. You only see a tenth of what is true. There are a million little strings attached to every choice you make; you can destroy your life every time you choose. But maybe you won't know for twenty years. And you may never ever trace it to its source. And you only get one chance to play it out. Just try and figure out your own divorce. And they say there is no fate, but there is: it's what you create. And even though the world goes on for eons and eons, you are only here for a fraction of a fraction of a second. Most of your time is spent being dead or not yet born. But while alive, you wait in vain, wasting years, for a phone call or a letter or a look from someone or something to make it all right. And it never comes or it seems to but it doesn't really. And so you spend your time in vague regret or vaguer hope that something good will come along. Something to make you feel connected, something to make you feel whole, something to make you feel loved. And the truth is I feel so angry, and the truth is I feel so ******* sad, and the truth is I've felt so ******* hurt for so ******* long and for just as long I've been pretending I'm OK, just to get along, just for, I don't know why, maybe because no one wants to hear about my misery, because they have their own. Well, **** everybody. Amen.
I don't know what I'm doing.
I wish we had this when we were young. And all those years in between.
My father died. They said his body was riddled with cancer and that he didn't know, he went in because his finger hurt. They said he suffered horribly, and that he called out for me before he died. They said that he said he regretted his life. They said he said a lot of things, too many to recount, and they said it was the longest and the saddest deathbed speech any of them had ever heard.
I never feel sorry for anything that happens to a woman.
Has somebody come to town!
Have you ever seen what a .44 Magnum will do to a woman's *****? Now that you should see. What a .44 Magnum will do to a woman's ***** that you should see?
Listen, you fuckers, you screwheads. Here is a man who would not take it anymore. A man who stood up against the scum, the *****, the dogs, the filth, the ****. Here is a man who stood up.
I think I know what you mean, Travis.
Now I see this clearly. My whole life is pointed in one direction. There never has been a choice for me.
I first saw her at Palantine Campaign headquarters at 63rd and Broadway. She was wearing a white dress. She appeared like an angel. Out of this filthy mess, she is alone. They... cannot... touch... her.
I realize now how much she's just like the others, cold and distant, and many people are like that, women for sure, they're like a union.
Each night when I return the cab to the garage, I have to clean the *** off the back seat. Some nights, I clean off the blood.
The days go on and on... they don't end. All my life needed was a sense of someplace to go. I don't believe that one should devote his life to morbid self-attention, I believe that one should become a person like other people.
How's everything in the pimp business?
Twelve hours of work and I still can't sleep. ****. Days go on and on. They don't end.
The idea had been growing in my brain for some time: TRUE force. All the king's men cannot put it back together again.
Come with me if you want to live.
Pain can be controlled - you just disconnect it.
That bum. So what if he has a Porsche? He can't treat ya like this. It's Friday night, for Christ's sake.
I'm Reese. Sergeant Tech-Com, DN38416. Assigned to protect you. You've been targeted for termination.
Guard it for me, big buns.
I came across time for you, Sarah. I love you. I always have.
Cyborgs don't feel pain. I do. Don't do that again.
I can hear it now. He's going to be called the god-****** phonebook killer.
Hey, man, you've got a serious attitude problem.
This is 1-L19. Westbound on Olympic approaching Overland.
Look at it this way: in a hundred years, who's gonna care?
The hardest thing is deciding what I should tell you and what not to. Well, anyway, I've got a while yet before you're old enough to understand the tapes. They're more for me at this point... to help get it all straight. Should I tell you about your father? That's a tough one. Will it change your decision to send him here... knowing? But if you don't send Kyle, you could never be. God, you can go crazy thinking about all this... I suppose I'll tell you... I owe him that. And maybe it'll be enough if you know that in the few hours we had together we loved a lifetime's worth.
Hey, buddy, did you just see a real bright light?
Listen, and understand. That terminator is out there. It can't be bargained with. It can't be reasoned with. It doesn't feel pity, or remorse, or fear. And it absolutely will not stop, ever, until you are dead.
There's a storm coming.
I swear I will not kill anyone.
Hello, Doctor Silbermann. How's the knee?
So, what's your story?
Come with me if you want to live!
What's wrong with your eyes?
I know now why you cry. But it's something I can never do.
The whole thing goes: The future's not set. There's no fate but what we make for ourselves.
Watching John with the machine, it was suddenly so clear. The terminator, would never stop. It would never leave him, and it would never hurt him, never shout at him, or get drunk and hit him, or say it was too busy to spend time with him. It would always be there. And it would die, to protect him. Of all the would-be fathers who came and went over the years, this thing, this machine, was the only one who measured up. In an insane world, it was the sanest choice.
Hasta la vista, baby.
We got Skynet by the balls now, don't we?
Now don't take this the wrong way, but you're a terminator, right?
You're the one livin' in a ******' dream, Silberman! 'Cause I know when it happens! It happens!
The unknown future rolls toward us. I face it, for the first time, with a sense of hope. Because if a machine, a Terminator, can learn the value of human life, maybe we can too.
Your foster parents are kinda dicks, huh?
John Connor... We gotta find this guy.
Sniff something? Did ya, rat boy?
When you're hanging on by your fingernails, you can't go waving your arms around.
Huh. **** rat's breathing that ****. That is no ********, hands down. The Goddamnedest thing I ever saw.
She didn't leave me. She just left me behind.
It went straight for the warhead, and they think it's cute.
I need you to believe me right now. Please?
Sixty knots? No way, Barnes. The Reds don't have anything that fast.
Everybody just stay calm. The situation is under control.
These guys are about as much fun as a tax audit.
The bad news is we got eight hours in this can blowin' down... And the worse news is, it's gonna take us three weeks to decompress later.
Keep your pantyhose on.
We have no way of warning the surface. And you know what that means? It means, whatever happens, is up to us.
How do you know they're really gonna do it? Where do you get off passing judgment on us? You can't be sure. How do you know?
We all see what we want to see. Coffey looks and he sees Russians. He sees hate and fear. You have to look with better eyes than that.
It's a bottomless pit, baby. Two-and-a-half miles straight down.
Howdy. Uh... How are you guys doin'?
I would die for her. I would kill for her. Either way, what bliss.
It was just a party. It's over. It means nothing. The Siamese twins, the hunchback, Cousin It, they're not *you*.
I'm a homicidal maniac, they look just like everyone else.
Don't torture yourself, Gomez. That's my job.
You've done this before.
I've come for your tv. You've been using too much juice. Another 10,000 kilowatts again this month. Beats me how an old, homicidal loony can use that much power.
It's not my goddamn planet. Understand, monkey boy?
May I pass along my congratulations for your great interdimensional breakthrough. I am sure, in the miserable annals of the Earth, you will be duly enshrined.
Let's go back up to my office and talk about this like two reasonable beings.
Sealed with a curse as sharp as a knife. Doomed is your soul and ****** is your life.
The man's been through solid matter, for crying out loud. Who knows what's happened to his brain? Maybe it's scrambled his molecules. All I'm saying is, Mr. President, let's not panic.
BANZAI! I'LL-A SEE YOU IN-A ****!
I don't give a flying handshake what your name is.
Take her to the Pitt. Go, Big-booty. Use more honey. Find out what she knows.
Clint Eastwood... I ****** 'im.
What... you didn't really think we'd kill the ******' koala bear, now did ya?
You got to shave before you leave the house in a dress like that... and I don't mean your legs.
Oh, Arnie. Sometimes when we touch, the honesty's too MUCH.
hibb... hibbdy... Maybe I did die in the explosion, you know.
Your assistant is quite special. I look forward to raping her at your funeral.
So many assholes... So few bullets...
****, baby, I hope you signed some organ donor cards.
Here's to you, Johnny. Sucking my ****.
Hey, great pipes, huh? I've heard cats **** with more harmony.
You're 10 seconds away from the most embarrassing moment in your life.
Mr. President, you've got bigger problems than losing me. You just lost my vote.
It's sass, right? You're sassin' me.
I feel a nightmare coming on...
The White House is the single greatest home court advantage in the modern world.
Perhaps it would be better if you bill me for the flowers, I'm sure it'll be all right with your boss... Well, I don't know if you recognize my voice, but this is the president... Of the United States!... Hello?
If you were a dork you should say you're sorry. Girls like that.
Dig it, Miss Wade-you're the President's Girlfriend!
Seven trillion dollar communications system at my disposal, and I can't find out if the Packers won.
Let me see if I got this. The third story on the news tonight was that someone I didn't know thirteen years ago when I wasn't president participated in a demonstration where no laws were being broken in protest of something that so many people were against, it doesn't exist anymore. Just out of curiosity, what was the fourth story?
If anyone needs me, I'll be in the Roosevelt Room, giving Lewis oxygen.
Yeah, hi, good morning... how do I get an outside line?  Well, that was easy.
There's never an egg timer around when you need one.
Sydney, Congress doesn't take this long.
We had a nice couple of minutes together. She threatened me, I patronized her. Didn't have anything to eat, but I thought there was a connection.
America isn't easy. America is advanced citizenship. You've got to want it bad, because it's gonna put up a fight. It's gonna say, "You want free speech? Let's see you acknowledge a man whose words make your blood boil who is standing center stage and advocating at the top of his lungs that which you would spend a lifetime opposing at the top of yours. You want to claim this land as the 'land of the free'? Then the symbol of your country cannot just be a flag. The symbol also has to be one of its citizens exercising his right to burn that flag in protest. Now show me that, defend that, celebrate that in your classrooms. Then you can stand up and sing about the 'land of the free.'"
Um... I lost my husband and my beeper... have you seen either one of them?
That's the way it crumbles... cookie-wise.
Why do people have to love people anyway?
Premium-wise and billing-wise, we are eighteen percent ahead of last year, October-wise.
All right, Miss Kubelik, get up.  It's past checking-out time. The management would greatly appreciate it if you would get the **** out of here!  I used to like you. I used to like you a lot. But it's all over between us. So beat it!  Oh, you, tee, out!  C'mon, wake up!  Oh, my God...!
Just because I wear a uniform doesn't make me a girl scout.
Ya know, I used to live like Robinson Crusoe; I mean, shipwrecked among 8 million people. And then one day I saw a footprint in the sand, and there you were.
Miss Kubelik, one doesn't get to be a second administrative assistant around here unless he's a pretty good judge of character, and as far as I'm concerned you're tops. I mean, decency-wise and otherwise-wise.
'Twas the night before Christmas and all through the house, not a creature was stirring... nothin'... no action... dullsville!
I'd like to spell it out for you... only I can't spell!
I was jinxed from the word go. The first time I was ever kissed was in a cemetery.
You fool. You **** fool.
Mildred! He's at it again.
I'm not the madam, kid. I'm just one of the ******, just like you.
How real do you feel, Mrs. Peel?
Mrs. Peel, you're needed.
He's a VH1 documentary without the music.
A funny thing just happened to me. I thought you were dead on the couch.
Richard, this is just the kind of pretentious ******** that Americans always say to French girls so they can sleep with them.
When you develop an infatuation for someone you always find a reason to believe that this is exactly the person for you. It doesn't need to be a good reason. Taking photographs of the night sky, for example. Now, in the long run, that's just the kind of dumb, irritating habit that would cause you to split up. But in the haze of infatuation, it's just what you've been searching for all these years.
Now get some sleep, I may wish to have *** again before we eat breakfast.
You hope, and you dream. But you never believe that something's gonna happen for you. Not like it does in the movies. And when it actually does, you want it to feel different, more visceral, more real. I was waiting for it to hit me, but it just wouldn't happen. The police were ****** cuz he was traveling under a false passport. But they didn't ask me about the map, so - I didn't tell 'em.
I'm the only one who does believe. I see him for the power-drunk madman he is. And we're supposed to worship such a deity? I say never.
Yes, Walter, you're right. There is an unspoken message here. It's "**** YOU, LEAVE ME THE **** ALONE!" Yeah, I'll be at practice.
Fifteen, Dude. This is it. Let's take that hill!
My only hope is that the big Lebowski kills me before the Germans can cut my **** off.
I just want to understand this, sir. Every time a rug is micturated upon in this fair city, I have to compensate the owner?
Hey, careful, man, there's a beverage here!
That rug really tied the room together.
H-hey, this is a private residence, man!
**** it, Dude, let's go bowling.
What's this day of rest ****? What's this ********? I don't ******' care! It don't matter to Jesus. But you're not foolin' me, man. You might fool the ***** in the league office, but you don't fool Jesus. This bush league psyche-out stuff. Laughable, man - ha ha! I would have ****** you in the *** Saturday. I **** you in the *** next Wednesday instead. Wooo! You got a date Wednesday, baby!
Darkness warshed over the Dude - darker'n a black steer's tookus on a moonless prairie night. There was no bottom.
At least I'm housebroken.
Keep your ugly ******' goldbrickin' *** out of my beach community.
I told that ***** a ******' thousand times, I don't roll on shabbos!
Let me tell ya something - I dig your work. Playing one side against the other, in bed with everybody - just fabulous stuff.
Say, friend - you got any more of that good sarsaparilla?
Lady, I got buddies who died face down in the muck so that you and I could enjoy this family restaurant!
Oh boy. How ya gonna keep 'em down on the farm once they've seen Karl Hungus.
Where's the ******* money Lebowski?
They're gonna kill that poor woman.
The story is ludicrous.
Walter, I love you, but sooner or later, you're going to have to face the fact you're a goddamn moron.
He was innocent, not a charge was true, and they say he ran away... Branded!
That's right, Dude, they peed on your ******* rug.
Leads, yeah, sure. I'll just check with the boys down at the crime lab, they've got four more detectives working on the case. They got us working in shifts!  Leads!  Leads...
Let me explain something to you. Um, I am not "Mr. Lebowski". You're Mr. Lebowski. I'm the Dude. So that's what you call me. You know, that or, uh, His Dudeness, or uh, Duder, or El Duderino if you're not into the whole brevity thing.
Shut the **** up, Donny.
Whereas what we have here? A bunch of fig-eaters wearing towels on their heads, trying to find reverse in a Soviet tank. This is not a worthy adversary.
I'm throwing rocks tonight. Mark it, Dude.
Oh, ******* ****. I can't breathe.
Don't they ever stop migrating?
It's the end of the world
I think you'd rather **** me than kill me. But you don't have the guts to do either.
The Dahlia's a sister?
Poor Betty... her problem wasn't too many enimies; it was too many friends.
Adios yourself back to the halls of Tripoli, shitbird, I've got business with the lady.
Losing the first Bleichert-Blanchard fight got me local celebrity Warrants and close to nine grand in cash. Winning the rematch got me a sprained wrist, two dislocated knuckles, and the rest of the day off.
Hearty fare breeds hearty people, haute cuisine breeds degenerates.
Uh, Eve, this is Adam. Look, I just wanted to thank you for everything you did for me. And I wanted to tell you that I... that uh... that I wish so many good things for you. I wish so hard that all of your dreams come true, and... and that's all I... and that's all.
You have a wonderful sense of humor, son, I must say. The acorn does not fall far from the tree.
Lying can be a very effective dating tool.
Oh my lucky stars! A Negro!
I am a small man, a humble man. Being poor I have had to do much that I did not want to do. But so long as the great Dr McFarlane comes to my whistle, that long am I a man. If I have not that then I have nothing. Then I am only a cabman and a grave robber. You'll never get rid of me, Toddy.
Television. Television is the explanation for this - you see this in bad television. Little assault guys creeping through the vents, coming in through the ceiling - that James Bond **** never happens in real life! Professionals don't do that!
Hey, Boris. What would you do if I told you your pinko Commie mother sucked so much ****, her face looks like an egg?
Just pour the drink, you fairy ****.
Hey ****-***, give me a beer.
I'll catch you on the flip side.
First of all, I'd like to thank whichever one of you donut-munching, barrel-assed, pud-pulling sissies leaked this to the press. That's just what we need now: some sensational story in the papers making these boys out to be superheroes, triumphing over evil. Let me squash the rumors now. These two are not heroes. They're just two ordinary men who were put in an extraordinary situation and they just happened to come out on top. Yes, nothing from our far-reaching computer system has turned up diddly on these two. All we know is what we found out from the neighbors, and the general consensus is, they're angels. But angels don't kill. And we got two bodies in the morgue that look like they've been "serial-crushed by some huge friggin' guy".
You must watch, dear. It'll all be over soon.
Now, you Irish cops are perking up. That's two sound theories in one day, neither of which deal with abnormally sized men. Kind of makes me feel like Riverdancing.
The 90's are killing me. I shouldn't have done that. You're not supposed to tell a guy you're gonna kill him no more. I got to tiptoe through the tulips with these assholes. Taking all the fun out of the job.
So Duffy, you got any theories to go with that... tie?
Oh, isn't that beautiful? All the lowlifes in quiet city Boston start dropping dead and *you* think it's unrelated! Greenly, the day I want the Boston Police to do my thinking for me, I will have a ******* tag on my toe!
Why don't you make like a tree, and get the **** outta here?
And Shepherds we shall be For Thee my Lord, for Thee Power hath descended forth from Thy hand Our feet may swiftly carry out Thy commands. So we shall flow a river forth to Thee And teeming with souls shall it ever be. In Nomine Patri, Et Fili, Et Spiritus Sancti.
So you're telling me it was one guy with six guns, and he was a senior frigging citizen?
I ain't getting him no ******* bagel.
We'll start the ***-kissing with you.
Oh really! I might just be wanting a bagel with my coffee.
Yeah, it's St. Patty's Day, everyone's Irish tonight. Why don't you just pull up a stool and have a drink with us?
It looks like we've got us a cowboy.
I guess you're not home.
He went out the window... why would someone do that?
How could I forget about you? You're the only person I know.
I work alone like you. We always work alone.
This is not a drill, soldier. We clear on that? This is a live project. You're a go. Training is over. Training is over.
Jesus Christ, that's Jason Bourne!
Issue a standing kill order on Jason Bourne, effective immediately.
You'd better get yourself a good lawyer.
Do you even know why you're supposed to kill me? Look at us. Look at what they make you give.
Our target is a British national - Simon Ross, a reporter. I want all his phones, his BlackBerry, his apartment, his car, bank accounts, credit cards, travel patterns - I want to know what he's going to think before he does. Every dirty little secret he has, and most of all we want the name and real-time location of his source. This is NSA priority level 4. Any questions?
Why didn't you take the shot?
Turn off the tape recorder.
Listen, people - do you have any idea who you're dealing with? This is Jason Bourne. You are nine hours behind the toughest target you have ever tracked. Now I want everyone to sit down, strap in, and turn on all you've got. That would mean now.
Saturday, March 24,1984. Shermer High School, Shermer, Illinois, 60062. Dear Mr. Vernon, We accept the fact that we had to sacrifice a whole Saturday in detention for whatever it was we did wrong. What we did *was* wrong. But we think you're crazy to make us write an essay telling you who we think we are. What do you care? You see us as you want to see us - in the simplest terms, in the most convenient definitions. You see us as a brain, an athlete, a basket case, a princess and a criminal. Correct? That's the way we saw each other at 7:00 this morning. We were brainwashed.
Yo wastoid, you're not gonna blaze up in here.
Chicks cannot hold their smoke, dat's what it is.
My impression of life at Big Bri's house, "Son?" "Yeah, Dad?" "How was your day, son?" "Great, Dad. How's yours?" "Super. Say, how would like to go fishing this weekend?" "Great, Dad. But I got homework to do." "That's okay, son. You can do it on the boat." "Gee." "Hon, isn't our son swell?" "Yes, dear. Isn't life swell?"
Screws fall out all the time, the world is an imperfect place.
That man... is a brownie hound.
That's very clever, sir. But what if there's a fire? I think violating fire codes and endangering the lives of children would be unwise at this juncture in your career, sir.
Being bad feels pretty good, huh?
You keep eating your hand and you're not gonna be hungry for lunch...
You know how you said before, how your parents use you to get back at each other? Wouldn't I be outstanding in that capacity?
Why is that door closed? WHY IS THAT DOOR CLOSED?
I don't have to runaway and live in the street. I can runaway and I can go to the ocean, I can go to the country, I can go to the mountains. I could go to Israel, Africa, Afghanistan.
I'd do that. I'll do anything sexual, and I don't need a million dollars to do it either. I'm a nymphomaniac.
Hey, how come Andrew gets to get up? If he gets up, we'll all get up, it'll be anarchy.
Hey, homeboy, what do you say we close that door, we'll get the prom queen impregnated.
I just wanna know how one becomes a janitor because Andrew here is very interested in pursuing a career in the custodial arts.
You think he's funny? You think this is cute? You think he's "bitchin," is that it? Let me tell you something. Look at him - he's a bum. You want to see something funny? You go visit John Bender in five years. You'll see how ********* funny he is.
Naked blonde walks into a bar with a poodle under one arm, and a two-foot salami under the other. The bartender says, I guess you won't be needing a drink. Naked lady says...  Oh, ******.
You ask me one more question and I'm beating the **** out of you.
Oh, obscene finger gestures from such a pristine girl.
We're all pretty bizarre. Some of us are just better at hiding it, that's all.
Are you gonna be, like, a shopping bag lady? You know, like, sit in alleyways and, like, talk to buildings and wear men's shoes and that kinda thing?
Does Barry Manilow know that you raid his wardrobe?
Keep your ******' hands off me! I'd expect better manners from you, ****.
You're kind of **** when you're angry.
So, do you want more eggs or should we just **** on the linoleum one last time?
I don't want to need you, 'cause I can't have you.
They came home. And with them, my life of details.
That's my new favorite camel.
Eat your waffles, fat man.
and being who he wasn't, could be as he wished to be
You don't understand what my brother does. He writes his cons the way dead Russians write novels, with thematic arcs and embedded symbolism and ****. And he wrote me as the vulnerable anti-hero. And that's why you think you want to kiss me. It's a con.
Trying to get something real by telling yourself stories is a trap.
You were the only audience I ever needed.
I'm not thrilled they set this in Mexico. There could be legitimate reasons, but Mexico's- and I don't like to simplistically vilify an entire country- but Mexico's a horrible place.
I don't know about "truths." A photograph is a secret about a secret. The more it tells, the less you know.
A thunderstorm! I LOVE thunderstorms!
Yeah, you remember me? We had a nice chat once when I was seven...
You really have no clue how beautiful you are, do you?
You can't change who people are without destroying who they were.
**** on my ****, or blood on my knife?
You can't play God son.
I'm not a doctor. I haven't been to medical school; I haven't even been to high school.
I've looked at so many women. I've seen everything, and felt nothing. But when I look at you, it hurts.
You don't find it depressing that Homer Wells is picking apples?
No, Lady; he hasn't gotten to me. Not yet; but he might, he just might.
Jesus, Bernie, is that what you think? That I would **** with your happiness? That hurts me.
Gentlemen, I want to thank you for your vote of confidence. As the new director of casino operations I want to make a personal guarantee to each and every one of you that your investment in the Golden Shangri-La will be well looked after. The future looks very bright, gentlemen. Very, very bright.
Don't get me wrong. Nostalgia is great. We love nostalgia. But nostalgia belongs in a museum. I think there comes a time to decide whether you're running a museum or you're running a casino.
You shouldn't smoke these. They'll kill you.
A whole jolly club with jolly pirate nicknames!
Take your shot, Funboy. You got me dead bang.
Victims; aren't we all?
Can't rain all the time...
What's all this happy horseshit?
Bingo! He shoots, he scores!
Goddamn creatures of the night. They never learn.
Great. A guy shows up looking like a mime from **** and you lose him right out in the open. Well, at least he didn't do that walking against the wind ****, I hate that.
You know, Lake Erie actually caught on fire once from all the **** floating around in it. I wish I could've seen that.
Holy ****! God-****** foreign cars!
Do you know what they call a gathering of crows? Curve? A murder. A murder of crows. Think about it.
Congratulations, Monkey! You just bought yourself a fighting chance!
I'll start with Nemo, and then work my way up the food chain.
Can you look destiny in the eye without flinching?
Nothing personal, sport.
Life is just a dream on the way to death.
Some people are just born victims.
You're wasting your breath Angelito. Nobody's up there... listening.
People used to put coins in the mouths of the dead. Do you know why? So they could pay the ferryman to take them across the river Styx.
The dead can return given sufficent motivation.
I want to see you bend over... Officer Dutton.
Gas, spark, bad combination.
I broke a heel! I don't make it a point to walk about in my stocking feet!
It's not about how well you play, it's how you feel about what you play.
You can be as mad as a mad dog at the way things went. You could swear, curse the fates, but when it comes to the end, you have to let go.
I'm always lookin' out my own eyes.
It's a funny thing about comin' home. Looks the same, smells the same, feels the same. You'll realize what's changed is you.
Some nights, I'd have to sleep alone. I didn't mind, I would listen to the house breathin'. All those people sleepin'. I felt... safe.
For what it's worth: it's never too late or, in my case, too early to be whoever you want to be. There's no time limit, stop whenever you want. You can change or stay the same, there are no rules to this thing. We can make the best or the worst of it. I hope you make the best of it. And I hope you see things that startle you. I hope you feel things you never felt before. I hope you meet people with a different point of view. I hope you live a life you're proud of. If you find that you're not, I hope you have the strength to start all over again.
Benjamin, we're meant to lose the people we love. How else would we know how important they are to us?
Did I ever tell you I been struck by lightning seven times? Once when I was just sittin' in my truck just minding my own business:
You'll see little man, plenty of times you be alone. You different like us, it's gonna be that way. But I tell you a little secret I find out. We know we alone. Fat people, skinny people, tall people, white people... they just as alone as us... but they scared shitless.
What if I told you that instead of gettin' older, I was gettin' younger than everybody else?
You as ugly as an old pot, but you still a child of God...
We're from the north, Pete. What do we care about Brighton? Bloody southerners. Look where we are! We're almost in France!
Oh, I don't like to be beside the seaside...
I like you Mr. Carpenter, you're a real screwball!
Department of Commerce. She's a secretary. They have a man they call the Secretary, but he isn't at all. My mother's a *real* secretary.
Gort! Klaatu barada nikto!
We have come to visit you in peace and with goodwill.
I won't resort to threats, Mr. Harley. I merely tell you the future of your planet is at stake.
When I was growing up, they would say you could become cops or criminals. But what I'm saying is this. When you're facing a loaded gun, what's the difference?
What we generally do - in this country... is one guy brings the items and the other guy pays him. No tickee, no laundry!
******* Ricans think they know everything. If they knew ****, they wouldn't be Puerto Ricans.
Do you want him to chop me up and feed me to the poor, huh, is that what you want?
If we're not gonna make it, it's gotta be you that gets out, cause I'm not capable. I'm ******* Irish, I'll deal with something being wrong for the rest of my life.
I can't wait to see you explain this one to a ******* Suffolk County jury you ******* **********. This is gonna be ******* fun!
One of us had to die. With me, it tends to be the other guy.
What Freud said about the Irish is: We're the only people who are impervious to psychoanalysis.
I'm concerned about a Chinaman who thinks it's wise to come to a business transaction with automatic weapons.  For his own good, tell Bruce Lee and the Karate Kids none of us are carrying automatic weapons. Because here - in this country... it don't add inches to your ****. You get a life sentence for it.
We're not here to solve the case of the missing scumbag, we're here to nail Costello.
And I thought that I was the liar!
I'm the poet and you're my muse.
They don't want me - they want my *death*!
I am the Lizard King. I can do anything.
We're gonna **** death away!
I think I'm having a nervous breakdown.
Come on, let's get some tacos.
I was stoned. It seemed like a fun thing to do at the time.
Somebody gave me this telephone... I think it was Edie... yeah it was Edie... and she said I could talk to God with it, but uh... I don't have anything to say... so here...  this is for you... now you can talk to God.
What's wrong with being a large mammal?
Actually I don't remember being born, It must have happened during one of my black outs.
Some of the worst mistakes of my life have been haircuts.
You're a poet, not a rock star.
Nietzsche said, "All great things must first wear terrifying and monstrous masks in order to inscribe themselves on the hearts of humanity."
Love, death, travel, revolt, chaos.
Have you ever eaten human flesh?
Luck, my friend, luck. Who needs it more than we?
Never. Oh, never. Nothing will die. The stream flows, the wind blows, the cloud fleets, the heart beats. Nothing will die.
Am I a good man? Or a bad man?
I am not an elephant! I am not an animal! I am a human being! I am a man!
Hello... my name is... John Merrick.
People are frightened by what they don't understand.
Life!... is full of surprises. Consider the fate of this creature's poor mother, struck down in the fourth month of her maternal condition by an elephant, a wild elephant. Struck down!... on an uncharted African isle. The result is plain to see... Ladies and gentlemen... The terrible... Elephant... Man...
Am I K in your book? I think I must be.
Do you think you are the only one who feels anything?
I once traveled with a guide who was taking me to Faya. He didn't speak for nine hours. At the end of it he pointed at the horizon and said, "Faya!" That was a good day.
You speak so many bloody languages, and you never want to talk.
I wanted to meet the man who could write such a long paper with so few adjectives.
I have to teach myself not to read too much into everything. It comes from too long having to read so much into hardly anything at all.
Ownership. I hate being owned.
I must be a curse. Anybody who loves me, anybody who gets close to me... or I must be cursed. Which is it?
I once heard of a captain who wore a patch over a good eye. The men fought harder for him.
There is no God, but I hope someone watches over you.
Ask your saint who he is. Ask him who he's killed.
Every night I cut out my heart. But in the morning it was full again.
You are a Canadian spy working for the Allies. Code-name Moose.
Father, could you help an old altar boy? I'm Cat'lick.
Stick your **** up her ***, you motherfucking worthless **********.
They've found something... small pieces.
Your mother's in here, Karras. Would you like to leave a message? I'll see that she gets it.
Cunting Hun! Bloody **** butchering **** pig!
My idea of Heaven is a solid white nightclub with me as a headliner for all eternity, and they *love* me.
Especially important is the warning to avoid conversations with the demon. We may ask what is relevant but anything beyond that is dangerous. He is a liar. The demon is a liar. He will lie to confuse us. But he will also mix lies with the truth to attack us. The attack is psychological, Damien, and powerful. So don't listen to him. Remember that - do not listen.
Let Jesus **** you, let Jesus **** you. Let him **** you.
If certain British doctors never asked "What is this fungus?" we wouldn't today have penicillin, correct?
Take me. Come into me. God **** you. Take me. Take me.
Your mother sucks ***** in ****, Karras, you faithless slime.
Father Dyer? I thought you'd like to keep this.
So, what's for dessert?
There are no experts. You probably know as much about possession than most priests. Look, your daughter doesn't say she's a demon. She says she's the devil himself. And if you've seen as many psychotics as I have, you'd know it's like saying you're Napoleon Bonaparte.
The Power of Christ compels you!
There isn't a day in my life when I haven't felt like a fraud. I mean priests, doctors, I've talked to them all. I don't know anyone who hasn't felt that.
There seems to be an alien pubic hair in my gin. Never seen it before in my life! Have you?
Do you know what she did, your cunting daughter?
Keep away. The sow is mine.
You show me Regan's double, same face, same voice, everything. And I'd know it wasn't Regan. I'd know in my gut. And I'm telling you that 'thing' upstairs isn't my daughter. Now, I want you to tell me that you know for a fact that there's nothing wrong with my daughter, except in her mind. You tell me for a fact that an exorcism wouldn't do any good. You tell me that!
What's happened to you? Have you been kissing *** so long, you're starting to like it?
Listen, you're not going soft on me, are you? I mean, you're not going to start dreaming about me and waking up all sweaty and looking at me like I'm some sort of princess when I burp?
You can't keep coming in and out of people's lives, messing things up. It's not right.
If you could take a dump sometime in this century, then we could go home where it's warm.
Because you thought I was *cocky*, I'm now on a permanent *acid trip*?
Don't ***** up the best thing in your life just because you're a little unsure about who you are.
Father, are you sure she's a supreme being?
Finger's gonna kill me.
If you want something done, do it yourself. Yep!
Me fifth element - supreme being. Me protect you.
Torture who you have to, the President, I don't care. Just bring me the stones. You have one hour.
I was attacked, two kids tried to set me on fire.
I can't believe I'm on a first name basis with these peope!
I don't believe that God made man in his image. 'Cause most of the **** that happens comes from man. No, I think man was made in the Devil's image. And women were created out of God. 'Cause after all, women can have babies, which is kind of like creating. And which also accounts for the fact that women are so attracted to men... 'cause let's face it... the Devil is a **** of a lot more interesting! Believe me, I've slept with some saints in my day, I know what I'm talking about. So the whole point in life is for men and women to get married... so that God and the Devil can get together and work it out. Not that we have to get married. God forbid.
Holding my *****... what a wonderful way of saying how much you like me.
You ever read any Nietzsche? Nietzsche says there's two kinds of people in the world: people who are destined for greatness like Walt Disney... and Hitler. Then there's the rest of us, he called us "the bungled and the botched." We get teased. We sometimes get close to greatness, but we never get there. We're the expendable masses. We get pushed in front of trains, take poison aspirin... get gunned down in Dairy Queens.
I'm Anne Morrow Lindbergh, Jack - I can't find my baby.
I wish there was some way I could just pay the fine and go home.
The son of a ***** is here. I saw him. I'm gonna get him.  Son of a *****.
Thank you, Howard. Take what's left there with you and good night. Ah-ah... not that one. The little one.
You wanna play "hide the salami" with his old lady?
Alright, listen up, people. Our fugitive has been on the run for ninety minutes. Average foot speed over uneven ground barring injuries is 4 miles-per-hour. That gives us a radius of six miles. What I want from each and every one of you is a hard-target search of every gas station, residence, warehouse, farmhouse, henhouse, outhouse and doghouse in that area. Checkpoints go up at fifteen miles. Your fugitive's name is Dr. Richard Kimble. Go get him.
Discovering the object of the game *is* the object of the game.
You run the job, but I run the show.
Oh, you're right. The devil has come to Tsavo. Look at me! I am the devil.
Well, we all worked together. Worthy deeds were accomplished.
We have an expression in prize fighting: "Everyone has a plan until they've been hit." Well my friend, you've just been hit. The getting up is up to you.
You build bridges, John. You have to go where the rivers are.
Attention, shoppers. There's a Retail Rodeo special on aisle 3. Liquid Drain Cleaner, 2 12-ounce cans for $5.00. Liquid Drain Cleaner has churning power and it will churn right through your pipes. Ladies, you need female plumbing. Shove something clean and new up your filthy pipes. That's Liquid Drain Cleaner on aisle 3. Have a good day and thank you for shopping at Retail Rodeo.
How it all came down to this, only the Devil knows. Retail Rodeo is at the corner on my left. The motel is down the road to my right. I close my eyes and try to peer into the future. On my left, I saw days upon days of lipstick and ticking clocks, dirty looks and quiet whisperings. And burning secrets that just won't ever die away. And on my right, what could I picture? The blue sky, the desert earth, stretching out into the eerie infinity. A beautiful never-ending nothing.
As a girl you see the world as a giant candy store filled with sweet candy and such. But one day you look around and you see a prison and you're on death row. You wanna run or scream or cry but something's locking you up. Are the other folks cows chewing cud until the hour comes when their heads roll? Or are they just keeping quiet like you, planning their escape.
If I were a woman, I'd be a ****. A ******* ****.
Dear Justine, because of you I will be quitting the Retail Rodeo. The last two days have been the most God awful of my life. I've not been able to get rid of you in my head. I've never wanted anything so bad and I have wanted many things. I'd given up long ago on being gotten by someone else, and then you came along. The idea that I could be gotten because of circumstantial never get got is the worst feeling I've ever felt and I have felt many bad feelings. I'm sorry I can never see you again, Justine. Forgive me for being so weak, but that is who I am. Goodbye. Holden Worther. If, for some reason, you could change your mind and wanna be with me body and soul, meet me after work. I will be waiting for you at 5pm outside Chunky Cheese. If you are not there at five you will never see me again in your lifetime.
Holden gave me two of his stories to read. It was more like the story of what a story would be. It was about a boy who was put upon; whose mother is cold and selfish and whose father wanted him to play football. Other people didn't get him. Especiall girls. Soon enough the boy comes to believe that no one can ever really know him. He starts acting out, drinking and taking all kinds of drugs. At the end the boy kills himself by jumping over a bridge. The second story was pretty much the same as the first expect at the end the boy kills himself by drinking a bottle of bug poison.
That day I read the story Holden had wrote for me. It was kinda different from the other ones but kinda the same. It was about a girl who was put upon, whose job is like a prison, and whose life has lost all meaning. Other people don't get her, especially her husband. One day she meets a boy who is also put upon and they fall in love. After spending their whole lives never getting got, with one look they get each other completely. In the end the girl and the boy run away together into the wilderness, never to be heard from again.
Happy Halloween, Retail Rodeo shoppers. There's a Retail Rodeo special on all bulk candy on aisle 4. Ghouls and goblins, witches and warlocks, wandering these aisles day after day, I put a Halloween curse on your hellish heads.
If I could only get my hands on some money. If someone could just tell me the answer. I gotta do! But I don't ever do anything 'cos I end up thinking about it instead. I gotta do! But do what?
You know, sometimes I think to myself: At least it can't get any worse. But it can! It can get worse! As long as you can say you hit rock bottom, you haven't.
You're a hooker, you hooker.
After living in the dark for so long, a glimpse of the light can make you giddy. Strange thoughts come into your head and you better think'em. Has a special fate been calling you and you not listening? Is there a secret message right in front of you and you're not reading it? Is this your last, best chance? Are you gonna take it? Or are you going to the grave with unlived lives in your veins?
Look, maybe we could do something else together. Mrs. Robinson, would you like to go to a movie?
Mrs. Robinson, if you don't mind my saying so, this conversation is getting a little strange.
Do you need any gas, Father?
Sure don't look none too prosperous.
That Casy. He might have been a preacher but he seen things clear. He was like a lantern. He helped me to see things clear.
You and me got sense. Them Okies got no sense and no feeling. They ain't human. Human being wouldn't live the way they do. Human being couldn't stand to be so miserable.
Takes no nerve to do something, ain't nothin' else you can do.
There ain't nobody gonna push me of my land! My grandpa took up this land 70 years ago, my pa was born here, we were all born on it. And some of of us was killed on it! ...and some of us died on it. That's what make it our'n, bein' born on it,...and workin' on it,...and and dying' on it! And not no piece of paper with the writin' on it!
If there was a law, they was workin' with maybe we could take it, but it ain't the law. They're workin' away our spirits, tryin' to make us cringe and crawl, takin' away our decency.
Tom, you gotta learn like I'm learnin'. I don't know it right yet myself. That's why I can't ever be a preacher again. Preachers gotta know. I don't know. I gotta ask.
Well, Pa, a woman can change better'n a man. A man lives sorta - well, in jerks. Baby's born or somebody dies, and that's a jerk. He gets a farm or loses it, and that's a jerk. With a woman, it's all in one flow, like a stream - little eddies and waterfalls - but the river, it goes right on. Woman looks at it thata way.
Rich fellas come up an' they die, an' their kids ain't no good an' they die out. But we keep a'comin'. We're the people that live. They can't wipe us out; they can't lick us. We'll go on forever, Pa, 'cause we're the people.
Boy, watchu lookin' at? Watchu lookin' at? You limp noodle. Ya wanna kiss my ***? Ya wanna suck my ****?
Percy met your mouse.
I just can't see God putting a gift like that in the hands of a man who would kill a child.
Take my hand, boss. You see for yourself.
He's chokin'. Whatever he sucked out of her, he's choking on!
They usually call death row the Last Mile, but we called ours the Green Mile, because the floor was the color of faded limes. We had the electric chair then. Old Sparky, we called it. I've lived a lot of years, Ellie, but 1935 takes the prize. That was the year I had the worst urinary infection of my life. That was also the year of John Coffey and the two dead girls.
We'll be doing this for real tomorrow night and I don't want nobody to remember some stupid joke like that and get it going again. You ever try to not to laugh in church when something funny gets stuck in your head? Same goddamn thing.
You love your sister? You make any noise, you know what happens. I'm gonna kill her instead of you. Understand?
Seeing a man die isn't enough for you, you gotta be close enough to smell his nuts cook?
I guess sometimes the past just catches up with you, whether you want it to or not.
Please boss, don't put that thing over my face, don't put me in the dark. I's afraid of the dark.
A big man is ripping your ears off Percy. I'd do as he says.
We each owe a death - there are no exceptions - but, oh God, sometimes the Green Mile seems so long.
Wipe your face before you get up Dean.
The man is mean, careless, and stupid. Bad combination in a place like this.
I let Harry take those chains off you... you gonna be nice?
I couldn't help it, boss. I tried to take it back, but it was too late.
I think this boy's cheese has done slid off his cracker.
It's a tumor, Paul. A brain tumor. They got x-ray pictures of it. The size of a lemon, they said... way deep down inside where they can't operate. I haven't told her. I can't think of how. For the life of me, Paul, I can't think of how to tell my wife... she's going to die.
Do you leave a light on after bedtime? Because I get a little scared in the dark sometimes. If it's a strange place.
I dreamed of you. I dreamed you were wandering in the dark, and so was I. We found each other. We found each other in the dark.
I don't see why white man has to sit in a ****** electric chair. White man should have his own **** electric chair.
Honey, if you don't tell me what's on your mind, I'm afraid I'll have to smother you with a pillow.
Well, who's a boy gonna talk to if not his mother?
The last modern thing I liked was the miniskirt. With technology now, nobody understands it... and that's the simple fact of the situation.
I gave you your life twice. I'm asking you to give me mine once.
The whole time I was in that house I felt something was wrong. What happened there?
I just want her to leave me alone!
It's the weekend, Budnick. I don't know you. You do not exist.
To a night the four of us will never forget!
And we're the three best friends that anyone could have!
Oh, come on this is crazy; maybe she doesn't want to be found.
You find out what you wanted to know... doctor?
Eleanor help me! I gotta pee!
He won't let them go!
Shabbat shalom, motherfuckers!
What with all the attention the newspapers and television has been giving you, you'd think you were the Pope or something.
My cane!  Give me back my cane! ****.
I hope you've all learned a very important lesson today. Just because Mordechai's people are different from us, and just because they may appear strange to us with their furry hats, beady eyes, and long sideburns, not to mention their bizarre customs and unnecessarily gutteral funny-sounding names. Just because they control ALL of the world's money, yet they are too cheap to buy their children anything better than spinning tops for presents, does not mean that we can't learn to love and respect them as our equals. Happy chanuyakah day 7, Mordy!
It is most gratifying that your enthusiasm for our planet continues unabated. As a token of our appreciation, we hope you will enjoy the two thermonuclear missiles we've just sent to converge with your craft. To ensure ongoing quality of service, your death may be monitored for training purposes. Thank you.
I checked The Guide for the best way to rescue a prisoner from Vogsphere, it said "don't".
Zaphod's just zis guy, ya know?
In the name of people, and freedom, and democracy, and stuff like that, I hereby kidnap myself, and I'm taking this ship with me. Whoo!
In the beginning the universe was created. This made a lot of people angry and has widely been considered as a bad move.
The election is ancient history, Zaphod. If memory serves, you won, proving that good looks and charm win over brilliance and the ability to govern. And for the record? You *are* stupid.
I can't do this without my third arm!
Resistance is useless!
Time is an illusion. Lunchtime, doubly so.
Vogon poetry is the third worst in the Universe. The second worst is that of the Azgoths of Kria. During a recitation by their Poet Master Grunthos the Flatulent of his poem "Ode to a Small Lump of Green Putty I Found in My Armpit One Midsummer Morning" four of his audience members died of internal hemorrhaging, and the President of the Mid-Galactic Arts Nobbling Council survived by gnawing one of his own legs off. The very worst poetry in the universe was written by Paula Nancy Millstone Jennings of Sussex. Thankfully it was destroyed when the earth was.
It won't affect me, I'm already a woman.
I've calculated your chance of survival, but I don't think you'll like it.
Life? Don't talk to me about life!
We don't want to be happy, we want to be famous.
If there's anything around here more important than my ego, I want it caught and shot now!
Vogons. They are one of the most unpleasant races in the galaxy. Not actually evil, but bad-tempered, bureaucratic, officious, and callous. They wouldn't even lift a finger to save their own grandmothers from the ravenous Bug-Blatter Beast of Traal without orders signed in triplicate, sent in, sent back, lost, found, queried, subjected to public inquiry, lost again, and finally buried in soft peat for three months and recycled as firelighter. On no account should you allow a Vogon to read poetry to you.
Here I am, brain the size of a planet, and they ask me to take you to the bridge. Call that job satisfaction, 'cause I don't.
OK. Leave this to me. I'm British. I know how to queue.
Greetings. This is a recorded announcement as we are all out at the moment. The Commercial Council of Magrathea thanks you for your esteemed visit but regrets that the entire planet is temporarily closed. If you would like to leave your name and a planet where you can be contacted, kindly do so at the tone.
They don't think, they don't imagine, most of them can't even spell, they just run things. And if we don't hitch a ride soon, you won't need the guide to tell you just how unpleasant they can be. They already destroyed a planet today, and that always makes them a little... eeee!
I should have said it resembles tea.
That doesn't sound good.
It must be Thursday. I never could get the hang of Thursdays.
How are you doing out there in Marlboro country?
Who's going to want me now?
It's hard for me to take your despair very seriously, Doctor. You obviously enjoy it so much.
I am the fool for Christ, and Paraclete of Caborca.
Say, buddy, who's the most liquid businessman on the street? Waring Hudsucker!
You're a MUNCIE girl?
I used to think you were a swell guy. Well, to be honest, I thought you were an imbecile. But then I figured out you WERE a swell guy... A little slow, maybe, but a swell guy. Well, maybe you're not so slow, But you're not so swell either. And it looks like you're an imbecile after all!
Sir, my leg is on fire!
Please Sir, this job, running the elevator is all I got.
Yeah, and if a frog had wings, it wouldn't bump it's *** a-hoppin'.
Strictly speaking, I'm never supposed to do this. But have you got a better idea?
Now let me ask you a question: Would an imbecile come up with this?
Fight on, fight on, dear old Muncie/Fight on, hoist the gold and blue/You'll be tattered, torn, and hurtin'/Once the Munce is done with you/Go... Eagles!
It's a pity to waste a whole Montecristo.
The Einstein of Enterprise. The Edison of Industry. The Billion Dollar Cranium. Idea Man. And not one of you mugs has given me a story on him! Bunch of lame-brained... Facts, figures, charts! They never sold a newspaper! I read this morning's edition of the Argus and let me tell you something: I'd wrap a fish in it! I'd use it as kindling! ****, I'd even train my poodle on it if he wasn't a French poodle and more partial to the pages of Paris Soir, but I sure wouldn't shell out a hard-earned nickel to read the dadblamed thing!
Martinis are for squares, man.
Norville Barnes, you don't know a thing about that woman. You don't know who she really is. Only a numbskull thinks he knows things about things he knows nothing about.
I spects old Moses knows just about everything, leastways if it concerns Hudsucker.
The barred-window boys are out looking for him now. We'll see how Wall Street likes the news that the president of Hudsucker is heading for the booby hatch. Huh! When Doc Bromfenbrenner gets through with him, he'll need diapers and a dribble cup!
You're here on a rain check, and I know it! You're hanging on by your nails. Let that glory whistle ring out loud and clear, and you're a wreck on a railroad track! You're a horse that finished last! Now, don't make trouble, Miss Lady Bug! Live and let live while you can!
You can't see it, can you, Charlie? I mean, you've never been able to see it. I came after him. And I'm gonna get him. I'm goin' with him all the way. The pool game is not over until Minnesota Fats says it's over. Is it over, Fats?
You know, I got a hunch, fat man. I got a hunch it's me from here on in. One ball, corner pocket. I mean, that ever happen to you? You know, all of a sudden you feel like you can't miss? 'Cause I dreamed about this game, fat man. I dreamed about this game every night on the road. Five ball. You know, this is my table, man. I own it.
I don't rattle, kid. But just for that I'm gonna beat you flat.
We have a contract of depravity; all we have to do is pull a blind down.
Maybe I'm not such a high-class piece of property right now. And a 25% slice of something big is better than a 100% slice of nothing.
I'm shooting pool, Fats. When I miss, you can shoot.
Get on me Bert, I can't lose.
Do you like to gamble, Eddie? Gamble money on pool games?
Big John, do you think this boy is a hustler?
A person's body is his temple.
I'll show you mine if you show me yours.
Because of molecules we are connected to the outside world from our bodies. Like when you smell things, because when you smell a smell it's not really a smell, it's a part of the object that has come off of it, molecules. So when you smell something bad, it's like in a way you're eating it. This is why you should not really smell things, in the same way that you don't eat everything in the world around you because as a smell, it gets inside of you. So the next time you go into the bathroom after someone else has been there, remember what kinds of molecules you are in fact eating.
Ben, you're boring me. I have a husband. I don't have a need for another one.
Mikey's been out of it since the day he was born.
Come here, you *****!
He's come to collect.  He's early.
Nothing is permanent, not even death.
Superladies? They're always trying to tell you their secret identity... think it'll strengthen the relationship or something like that. I say, "Girl, I don't wanna know about your mild-mannered alter ego or anything like that. I mean, you tell me you're, uh... S-Super, Mega, Ultra Lightning Babe, that's alright with me. I'm good... I'm good.
Snug, I'm calling in a solid you owe me.
I cut it a little roomy for the free movement, the fabric is comfortable for sensitive skin...  And it can also withstand a temperature of over 1000 degrees. Completely bulletproof...  And machine washable, darling. That's a new feature.
We're dead! We're dead! We survived but we're dead!
Stop it! We are not gonna die! Now, both of you will *get a grip*! Or so help me, I will *ground* you for a month. Understand?
Settle down, are you kidding? I'm at the top of my game! I'm right up there with the big dogs! Girls, come on. Leave the saving of the world to the men? I don't think so.
Of course I have a secret identity. Can you see me in this at the, at the supermarket? Come on! Who'd want to go shopping as Elastigirl, know what I mean?
No matter how many times you save the world, it always manages to get back in jeopardy again. Sometimes I just want it to stay saved! You know, for a little bit? I feel like the maid; I just cleaned up this mess! Can we keep it clean for... for ten minutes!
You're not affiliated with me!
Is this on? I mean, can break through walls, I just can't... can't get this on...
Under tremendous public pressure and the crippling financial burden of mounting lawsuits, the goverment quietly initiated the Superhero Relocation Program. Superheroes were granted amnesty from past actions under the promise to never again resume hero work. Where are they now? They are living among us. Average people, average citizens quietly and anonymously making the world a better place.
Look, I'm The Dash. The Dash likes. Yeah-hah.
Somebody needs to teach this hunk of metal... a few manners!
This isn't the end of it! I will get your son eventually! I will get your son!
It's bigger. It's badder. Ladies and gentlemen, it's too much for Mr. Incredible!
Every time they run, we take a shot!
Easy, Helen, easy, easy girl. You're overreacting, everything's fine, they're just... all getting coffee! At the same time. Yeah.
Behold, the Underminer! I'm always beneath you, but nothing is beneath me! I hereby declare war on peace and happiness! Soon, all will tremble before me!
We look like bad guys. Incompetent bad guys!
Hey! No force fields!
My God, you've gotten fat.
We've frozen all of Syndrome's assets. If he even sneezes, we'll be there with a hanky and a pair of handcuffs.
Of course I have a secret identity. I don't know a single superhero who doesn't. Who wants the pressure of being super all the time?
Whoa, whoa, whoa. Time out!
Oh, come on! You gotta admit this is cool! Just like a movie! The robot will emerge dramatically, do some damage, throw some screaming people, and just when all hope is lost, *Syndrome* will save the day! I'll be a bigger hero than you ever were!
Does this mean we have to move again?
What's this have to do with the price of tea in China?
You manipulated me into where I am now - staring at the Brown and Williamson Building. It's all dark except the tenth floor. That's the legal department, where they **** with my life!
So, what you're saying is it wasn't enough to fire me for no good reason. Now you question my integrity? On top of the humiliation of being fired, you threaten me? You threaten my family? It never crossed my mind not to honor my agreement. And I will tell you, Mr. Sandefur... and Brown & Williamson too - **** me? Well, **** you!
Will you tell him that when I conduct an interview, I sit anywhere I **** please!
No that's fame. Fame has a fifteen minute half-life, infamy lasts a little longer.
I never left a source hang out to dry, ever! Abandoned! Not 'till right ******* now. When I came on this job I came with my word intact. I'm gonna leave with my word intact. **** the rules of the game!
**** it. Let's go to court.
'Tortious interference?' That sounds like a disease caught by a radio.
I'm Lowell Bergmann, I'm from 60 Minutes. You know, you take the 60 Minutes out of that sentence, nobody returns your phone call.
Stay away from me. Stay *away* from me!
I know what you're facing, Jeff. And, I think I know how you're feeling. In the Navy I flew A-6's off carriers. In combat, events have a duration of seconds, sometimes minutes. But what you're going through goes on day in and day out. Whether you're ready for it or not, week in, week out. Month after month after month. Whether you're up or whether you're down. You're assaulted psychologically. You're assaulted financially, which is its own special kind of violence because it's directed at your kids. What school can you afford? How will that affect their lives? You're asking yourself, "Will that limit what they may become?" You feel your whole family's future's compromised, held hostage. I do know how it is.
"Mike"? Try "Mr. Wallace." We work in the same corporation, doesn't mean we work in the same profession. What are you gonna do now? You gonna finesse me? Lawyer me some more? I've been in this profession fifty ******* years. You and the people you work for are destroying the most-respected, the highest-rated, the most-profitable show on this network!
Do me a favor, will you - spare me, for God's sake, get in the real world, what do you think? I'm going to resign in protest? To force it on the air? The answer's "no". I don't plan to spend the end of my days wandering in the wilderness of National Public Radio. That decision I've already made.
You pay me to go get guys like Wigand, to draw him out. To get him to trust us, to get him to go on television. I do. I deliver him. He sits. He talks. He violates his own ******* confidentiality agreement. And he's only the key witness in the biggest public health reform issue, maybe the biggest, most-expensive corporate-malfeasance case in U.S. history. And Jeffrey Wigand, who's out on a limb, does he go on television and tell the truth? Yes. Is it newsworthy? Yes. Are we gonna air it? Of course not. Why? Because he's not telling the truth? No. Because he is telling the truth. That's why we're not going to air it. And the more truth he tells, the worse it gets!
Our standards have to be higher than anyone else because we are the standard of everyone else.
Hi, I'm Bob I'm the spokesperson for the Coca-Cola company. I'm here today to ask you to continue buying coke. Sure it's a drink you've been drinking for years, and if you still enjoy it, I'd like to remind you to buy it again sometime soon. It's basically just brown sugar water, we haven't changed the ingredients much lately, so there's nothing new I can tell you about that. We changed the can around a little bit though. See, the colors here are different there, and we added a polar bear so the kids like us. Coke is very high in sugar and like any high calorie soda it can lead to obesity in children and adults who don't sustain a very healthy diet. So that's it, it's coke. It's very famous, everyone knows it. I'm Bob, I work for coke, and I'm asking you to not stop buying coke. That's all.It's a bit sweet. Thank you.
Hang on, lads; I've got a great idea.
Jack Starks is *dead*.
How much time do we have?
I was 27 years old the first time I died.
The real events that have happened to me have been ****** up, not my mind!
In this grave hour **** **** **** perhaps the most fateful in our history bugger **** ****.  I send to every household of my p-p-peoples... The letter'P' is always difficult.
If we were equals, I wouldn't be here. I'd be at home with my wife, and no one would give a ****.
Waiting for me to... commence a conversation, one can wait rather a long wait.
This is not a game show, Mr. Fleury. And definitely there are no deals made here. There is me telling you what you may or may not do. And there is you doing it. That's it.
I don't like your jokes.
Saudis, like Americans, don't do manual labor.
The apostle John said, "Behold, there is a stranger in our midst come to destroy us."
I can't really play the buttsack.
We want that doughnut money!
******! Two thousand years after Jesus, thirty years after Martin Luther King, the age of Montel; sweet Lord of mercy is that where we at?
You, madam, are addressing a man, who is in fact quiet... and yet, not quiet, if I may offer to you a riddle.
You brought your ***** to the Waffle Hut?
And what, to flog a horse, that if not dead is at this point in mortal danger of expiring, does this little square represent?
Easiest thing in the world.
Oh look at this, I got blueberry syrup on my safari jacket.
Uh, can you wield the device with your maimed extremity?
Nobody likes you. Everybody hates you. You're gonna lose. Smile, you ****.
She's hot, Joe. She rates a three on my finger scale. That means I'd cut off three of my fingers if God would let me **** her.
It's okay. It's okay, folks. It's okay. It's okay. Thank you. Thank you. Danger is my middle name. Don't try this at home, folks. I'm a trained professional. There's me, and there's Super Dave.
I told you, if you ever touch me again, I'll kill you.
It was a war party. That means they're going to be attacking up and down the frontier.
Someday I think you and I are going to have a serious disagreement.
I just dropped in to see how you boys was doing.
You've done everything you can do. Save yourself! If the worst happens, and only one of us survives, something of the other does, too.
In case your aim's any better than your judgment.
Death and honor are thought to be the same, but today I have learned that sometimes they are not.
Great Spirit, Maker of All Life. A warrior goes to you swift and straight as an arrow shot into the sun. Welcome him and let him take his place at the council fire of my people. He is Uncas, my son. Tell them to be patient and ask death for speed; for they are all there but one - I, Chingachgook - Last of the Mohicans.
I am Le Long Carabine! My death is a great honor to the Huron, take me!
When the Grey Hair is dead, Magua will eat his heart. Before he dies, Magua will put his children under the knife, so the Grey Hair will know his seed is wiped out forever.
You've complimented me with your persistence and patience, but the decision I've come to is this. I would rather make the gravest of mistakes than surrender my own judgment.
Son of a ***** thinks he can win.
My ancestors have ruled Japan for 2,000 years. And for all that time we have slept. During my sleep I have dreamed. I dreamed of a unified Japan. Of a country strong and independent and modern... And now we are awake. We have railroads and cannon, Western clothing. But we cannot forget who we are. Or where we come from.
The perfect blossom is a rare thing. You could spend your life looking for one, and it would not be a wasted life.
Look at me! This is who I am, *this* is what you married. We may be older, maybe we're old, but I'm still your little chicken. And you're still my big ****.
If I had a wife like you, I would have blown my brains out. Or gone to America.
Wish he'd "Front Page" for me.
I thought you'd might like to strut the kitten right in the middle of her act.
It may sound like music to her. I can do better with my teeth in a cold shower.
Mamacita, let me in! Let me in! Let me in! If you love me, let me in!
You don't get the idea, mister. These cops banging those pans, flashing those lights, they're gonna scare that poor cat of mine. Cats are funny, mister. They don't want to hurt you, but if you scare them they go crazy. These cops, they don't know what they're doing.
There once was a ******* from Cancun/ who took a young man up to her room/ where they argued all night/ as to who had the right/ to do what and how much and to whom.
You work so hard not to be seen as a *** object. Before long, you're not seen at all.
There once was a girl named Berlin. Who wanted it now and again. Not "now and again". But Now! And again and again and again.
As the poets have mournfully sung/ death takes the innocent young/ the screamingly funny,/ the rolling in money,/ and those who are very well hung.
If you could afford a place like this, you'd buy a place like this.
There's one thing I don't understand. The thing I don't understand is every motherfuckin' word you're saying.
You tell him, you tell him I'm coming. Tell him I'm ******* coming!
Why don't they make shows about people's daily lives you'd be interested in watching? You know, like "Sick Old Man" or "Skinny Little Weakling." "Big Fat Guy." Wouldn't you watch a show called "Big Fat Guy"? I'd watch that ******* show.
Gee, you must have really been through something.
They're gonna blow my head off, you know. This is the last time I'll ever be pretty.
Suck my ****, every one of you ********.
I let you touch me, cowboy. I think I need a bath.
No. It's not a fantasy. I'm in the goddamn P.T.A...
Die screaming ************.
Don't give me attitude, sir.
Life is pain. Get used to it.
You couldn't hit a lake if you were standing on the bottom.
...It ain't over. You're going to die screaming... and I'm going to watch. Am I telling the truth?
What I'm saying is, back when we first met, you were all like "Oh phooey, I burned the darn muffins." Now, you go into a bar, ten minutes later, sailors come runnin' out. What up with that?
So... you, uh, ladies liking the angle of the dangle?
I'm warning you, I am a lethal killing machine. It was a secret government experiment. They did stuff to me. Spooky stuff... Anal stuff. It turned me into a dangerous telekinetic. As the ancient Tibetan Philosophy states "Don't start none, won't be none!"
Are you freebasing, Michael? Inquiring minds want to know.
One thing about living in Santa Carla I never could stomach, all the **** vampires.
Second shelf is mine. That's where I keep my rootbeers and my double-thick Oreo cookies. Nobody touches the second shelf but me.
They're only noodles Michael.
Look at your reflection in the mirror. You're a creature of the night Michael, just like out of a comic book! You're a vampire Michael! My own brother, a goddamn, ****-sucking vampire. You wait 'till mom finds out, buddy!
Lucy, you're the only woman I ever knew that didn't improve her situation by getting divorced.
Don't kill anyone until we get back to you!
I think I should warn you all, when a vampire bites it, it's never a pretty sight. No two bloodsuckers go the same way. Some yell and scream, some go quietly, some explode, some implode, but all will try to take you with them.
Peter, if you want me to run your little camping trip, there are two conditions: first, I'm in charge, and when I'm not around, Dieter is. All you have to do is sign the checks, tell us we're doing a good job, and open your case of scotch when we have a good day. Second condition: my fee? You can keep it. All I want in return for my services is the right to hunt one of the tyrannosaurs. A male, a buck only. How and when is my business. Now if you don't like either of those conditions, you're on your own. So go ahead, set up base camp right here, or in a swamp, or in the middle of a Rex nest for all I care. But I've been on too many safaris with rich dentists to listen to any more suicidal ideas, OK?
Do you see any family resemblance?
You like to have kids but you don't want to be with them, do you?
Ajay, go down to my ranch, take a look around the trophy room, and then tell me what kind of quarry is on this hunt that would interest me?
Don't go into the long grass!
That's the last time I leave you in charge.
Now you're John Hammond.
You have muddled everything from the start, taking that child with you from Marrakesh. Don't you realize that Americans dislike having their children stolen?
Sorry we were gone so long, but we had to pick up Hank!
If you ever get hungry, our garden back home is full of snails. We tried everything to get rid of them. We never thought of a Frenchman!
A man... a statesman... is to be killed... assassinated in London. Soon... very soon. Tell them in London... tell them to try Ambrose Chapel...
I was the principal barber now. I hired a new man for the second chair. I'd hired the guy who did the least gabbing when he came in for an interview, but I guess the new man had only kept quiet because he was nervous. Once he had the job he talked from the minute I opened the shop in the morning until I locked up at night. For all I know, he talked to himself on the way home.
Yeah, I worked in a barbershop, but I never considered myself a barber. I stumbling into it. Or married into it, more precisely.
What kind of a man are you?
You say he was being blackmailed, by who? You don't know. For having an affair, with who? You don't know. Did anyone else know about it? Probably not, you don't know.
Japs had us pinned down in Buna for something like six weeks. Well, I gotta tell ya, I thought *we* had it tough, but, Jesus, we had supply. *They* were eating grubs, nuts, thistles. When we finally up and bust off the beach we found Arnie Bragg, kid missing on recon; the Japs had *eaten* the ***********, if you'll pardon the, uh... And this was a scrawny, pimply kid too, nothin' to write home about. I mean, I never would've, ya know, so what do I say, honey? When I don't like dinner, what do I say? I say, 'Jesus, honey, Arnie Bragg - *again*'?
Me, I don't talk much... I just cut the hair
There they were. All going about their business. It seemed like I knew a secret, a bigger one even than what had really happened to Big Dave. Something none of them knew. Like I had made it to the outside somehow, and they were all still struggling way down below.
It was only a couple weeks later she suggested getting married. I said, "Don't you want to get to know me more?" She said, "Why? Does it get better?" She looked at me like I was a dope, which I never really minded from her. And she had a point, I guess. We knew each other as well then as now. Anyway, well enough.
My wife and I have not performed the *** act in many years.
I went to see a woman who was supposed to have powers of communicating with those who had "passed across" as she called it. She said that people who had passed across were picky about who they communicated with, not like most people you run into on this side. So you needed a guide, someone with a gift for talking to souls.
I'm all shot to ****.
They got this guy, in Germany. Fritz Something-or-other. Or is it? Maybe it's Werner. Anyway, he's got this theory, you wanna test something, you know, scientifically - how the planets go round the sun, what sunspots are made of, why the water comes out of the tap - well, you gotta look at it. But sometimes you look at it, your looking changes it. Ya can't know the reality of what happened, or what would've happened if you hadn't-a stuck in your own goddamn schnozz. So there is no "what happened"? Not in any sense that we can grasp, with our puny minds. Because our minds... our minds get in the way. Looking at something changes it. They call it the "Uncertainty Principle". Sure, it sounds screwy, but even Einstein says the guy's on to something.
Sooner or later everyone needs a haircut.
The assassin always dies, baby. It's necessary for the national healing.
Hello, Captain. Do you remember me?
Somebody got into our heads with big steel-toe boots, cable cutters and a chainsaw and they went to town. Neurons got got got exposed and circuits got rewired. Our brain cells got obliterated, Raymond.
No Milo, not the *cheese*... The *keys*!
50 grand. 50 grand to the man who finds that green-faced son of a ***** before the cops do. I want you to get the word out to every street hustler, to every lowlife in this town, you understand? I want him here tomorrow, alive.
Start dancing, and I'll blow your brains out!
The money better be here, Ipkiss. Or you're gonna "Ipkiss" your *** goodbye.
Genius. That was genius. Buddy, I have chills! What side of whose bed did you wake up on, man?
Do you know how hard it is to find a decent man in this town? Most of them think monogamy is some kind of wood.
I hate this place. This zoo. This prison. This reality, whatever you want to call it, I can't stand it any longer. It's the smell, if there is such a thing. I feel saturated by it. I can taste your stink and every time I do, I fear that I've somehow been infected by it.
Tell me, Mr. Anderson, what good is a phone call when you are unable to speak?
Welcome to the desert of the real.
Find them and destroy them
Perhaps we are asking the wrong questions.
I'm going to enjoy watching you die, Mr. Anderson.
Neo. You scared the b'Jesus out of me.
The time has come to make a choice, Mr. Anderson. Either you choose to be at your desk on time from this day forth, or you choose to find yourself another job.
Good ****, huh? It's good for two things: degreasing engines and killing brain cells.
Unfortunately, no one can be told what the Matrix is. You have to see it for yourself.
Never send a human to do a machine's job.
You know, I know this steak doesn't exist. I know that when I put it in my mouth, the Matrix is telling my brain that it is juicy and delicious. After nine years, you know what I realize?  Ignorance is bliss.
As you can see, we've had our eye on you for some time now, Mr. Anderson.
What is "real"? How do you define "real"?
Remember... all I'm offering is the truth. Nothing more.
Welcome to the real world.
Mr. Wizard. Get me the **** out of here.
It's the Silence of the Goats!
Now more than ever we need the Jedi.
Every single one of Bill's soldiers fired high. They instinctively hadn't wanted to shoot another person. Later Bill would come across a study which revealed that only 15-20% of fresh soldiers shot to kill. The rest aimed high, didn't fire at all, or pretended to be busy doing something else.
More of this is true than you would believe.
Oh, yeah. This just keeps gettin' better and better.
Here I come, laddies! Ha-ha-ha-ha!
Stupid superstitious *******.
Time to close the door.
Abdul?  Mohammed? ... Bob?
Mister O'Connell, can you look me in the eye, and guarantee me that this isn't all some kind of a flimflam?
We are in serious trouble.
It is better to be the right hand of the devil than in his path.
Oh my God it's a... it's a sarcophagus. Buried at the base of Anubis. He must have been someone of great importance. Or he did something *very* naughty.
Forget it. We're out the door, we're down the hall and we're gone.
Death is only the beginning.
I only gamble with my life, never my money.
You really thought you were going to find it...
Do you think he'll ever kiss me again?
The police can have the centre of the city sealed tight in fifteen minutes.
Lord, you sure knew what you were doing when you brung me to this very cell at this very time. A man with ten thousand dollars hid somewhere, and a widder in the makin'.
Open that door, you spawn of the devil's own strumpet!
It's a hard world for little things.
Salvation is a last-minute business, boy.
I feel clean now. My whole body's just a-quiverin' with cleanness.
You know, when you're little, you have more endurance than God is ever to grant you again. Children are man at his strongest. They abide.
I got tired of seein' children roamin' the woodlands without food, children roamin' the highways in this here Depression, children sleepin' in old abandoned car bodies in junk heaps. And I promised myself that I'd never see the day when my young-uns had want.
Child... You were looking for love, Ruby, in the only foolish way you knew how.
She'll not be back. I reckon I'm safe in promising you that.
A woman's a fool to marry for that. That's somethin' for a man. The Good Lord never meant for a decent woman to want that. Not really want it. It's all just a fake and a pipe dream.
Women are such durn fools.
When you've been married to a man for forty years you know all that don't amount to a hill of beans. I've been married to Walt that long and I swear in all that time I just lie there thinkin' about my canning.
No, no! Don't you touch that, little lamb. Don't touch my knife, that makes me mad. That makes me very, very mad.
They abide, and they endure.
She'll be losing her mind to a tricky mouth and a full moon, and like as not, I'll be saddled with the consequences.
There's too many of them. I can't kill the world.
The boy's as stubborn and as mulish as a sheep.
Man of my age needs a little snort in the morning, heat the boilers.
There are things you do hate, Lord. Perfume-smellin' things, lacy things, things with curly hair.
I can hear you whisperin' children, so I know you're down there. I can feel myself gettin' awful mad. I'm out of patience children. I'm coming to find you now.
Mmmmm... an interesting reaction! But what does it mean?
Won't they be impressed, I am a ge-ni-us! See how I transform this old rat inTO a most deLIGHTful hat!
Attacked by Christmas toys? That's strange, that's the second toy complaint we've had.
Release me fast or you will have to answer for this heinous act.
Bumpy sleigh ride, Jack!
The King of Halloween has been blown to smithereens! Skeleton Jack is now a pile of dust!
'Twas a long time ago, longer now than it seems in a place perhaps you've seen in your dreams. For the story you're about to be told began with the holiday worlds of auld. Now you've probably wondered where holidays come from. If you haven't I'd say it's time you begun.
Kidnap the Sandy Claws, / beat him with a stick, / lock him up for ninety years, / see what makes him tick.
What a joy to think of all *we'll* have in common. *We'll* have conversations *worth* having.
You've poisoned me for the last time, you wretched girl!
Eureka! This year, Christmas will be - OURS!
I am the shadow on the moon at night / Filling your dreams to the brim with fright.
I peeked behind the Cyclops' eye - I did! - But he wasn't there.
J-J-J-Jack! But they said you were dead. You must be - double dead!
Now look what you've done! My bugs! My bugs! My bugs!
Say it once, say it twice, take a chance and roll the dice. Ride with the moon in the dead of night.
Nice work, Bone Daddy!
Ashes to askes and dust to dust! Ohh... I'm feeling weak - with hunger! One more roll o the dice oughta do it!  WHAT? SNAKE-EYES!
How dare you treat my friend so shamefully!
What a splendid idea! This Christmas sounds fun. I fully endorse it -  let's try it at once!
No, Zero. Down, boy... My, what a brilliant nose you have. The better to light my way! You're the head of the team, Zero!
Yes, he totaled a car, but it was an environmentally friendly car. Why doesn't that get reported?
And then I met the most wonderful boy in the world. We would take long walks by the river. We spent hours gazing into each other's eyes. We were so very much in love. And then one day, he went away. And I thought I'd die, but I didn't. And when I didn't, I said to myself "is that all there is to love?"
One a scale of one to ten, you belong with the nines. We both know you won't settle for less.
This is not a murder. This is an intervention.
Look, I'm not some crazy Ted Bundy guy. I'm not going to rape or kill you or anything... which is of course what Ted Bundy would say.
Do you feel like a man? Because I'll tell you a little secret - you're not.
I'm a fan of yours, you know. Your number one fan. But if you **** this up, I'll smash your ankles with a sledgehammer!
He's not coming back.
Risk nothing and you gain nothing.
Younger than me, more beautiful than me, married before me. I'm eclipsed! *I'm* the other Boleyn girl.
To get ahead in this world, you need more than fair looks and a kind heart.
What will the King say when he finds out that I cannot bear children?
When was it that people stopped thinking of ambition as insane and started thinking of it as a virtue?
And risking civil war, the very thing Henry fears most. Somehow, I need to make him understand that this will be worth it. When I am his queen, and give him a son.
You better get used to talking about it, when you sleep with the king it ceases to be a private matter.
We're going to do this my way, no highway option.
I just got my eyebrows done!
That stuff doesn't hurt.
I'm a parent. I haven't got the luxury of principles.
Would you like a lesson, sir, in the rules of war? Or perhaps your children would?
Here, sell this. Food is more important than time.
20 zloty, that's all we have left, 20 zolty. What can I buy with 20 zloty? I am sick of cooking potatoes, potatoes, potatoes.
I told her not to worry, you had your papers on you. If you'd been hit by a bomb, they'd have known where to take you.
What... what do you think you'll do while you're setting up your new line of defense? Wander around luggin' your suitcases?
Majorek, this is the greatest pianist in Poland, maybe the whole world.
2,000 and my advice is to take it. What will you do when you're hungry? Eat the piano?
Well, to tell you the truth, I thought it would be worse.
Majorek used to be in the army. Brilliant man. The only thing I've got against him is he's not a socialist.
And the Germans claim to be intelligent! You know what I think, I think they are totally stupid. I have a family to feed. I spend half my time here, waiting for them to let us through. Why do they think I come here, to listen to the music?
Ah, more Jewish police. You mean you want me to beat up Jews and catch the Gestapo spirit? I see.
What a death! What a chance! What a surprise! My will has chosen life! Still it has had me spooked and many others besides!
One day when my mother and father were singing together in the forest, a great storm blew up out of nowhere. But so passionate was their singing that they did not notice, nor did they stop as the rain began to fall, and when their voices rose for the final bars of the duet a great bolt of lighting came out of the sky and struck my father so that he lit up like a torch. And at the same moment my father was struck dead my mother was struck dumb! She never spoke another word.
Undo your dress. I want to see your arms. Play. Two keys.
At night! I think of my piano in its ocean grave, and sometimes of myself floating above it. Down there everything is so still and silent that it lulls me to sleep. It is a weird lullaby and so it is; it is mine.
I have given the piano back to you. I've had enough. The arrangement is making you a *****, and me, wretched. I want you to care for me. But you can't. It's yours, leave. Go on, go.
I want to lie together without clothes on.
The question is not so much where we are as when we are.
What evidence? There were no weapons in that cave.
Who would like to buy some aspirin?
You know the saying, "Human see, human do."
Have you forgotten your scripture, the thirteenth scroll? "And Proteus brought the upright beast into the garden and chained him to a tree and the children did make sport of him."
You are a menace. A walking pestilence.
Nine or ten pints of scrumpy, that's what I want; I've lost a lot of blood!
Doctor, would an ape make a human doll that TALKS?
All right, get 'em out and get 'em clean! Chop chop!
You are right, I have always known about man. From the evidence, I believe his wisdom must walk hand and hand with his idiocy. His emotions must rule his brain. He must be a warlike creature who gives battle to everything around him, even himself.
Beware the beast Man, for he is the Devil's pawn. Alone among God's primates, he kills for sport or lust or greed. Yea, he will murder his brother to possess his brother's land. Let him not breed in great numbers, for he will make a desert of his home and yours. Shun him; drive him back into his jungle lair, for he is the harbinger of death.
Well, at least they haven't tried to bite us.
The Forbidden Zone was once a paradise. Your breed made a desert of it, ages ago.
Get away from me! I'll knock your head off!
Don't make me use this.
I was at the Battle of Georgetown; I watched the White House burn to the ground!
Tell me something: how much mail can a dead Postman deliver?
I have a feeling about you. I know you'll do what's right.
I know what your problem is. Do you know why you won't fight? Because you have nothing to fight for! You don't care about anything! You don't value anything! You don't believe in anything! That's what makes me better!
This is your daughter... her name is Hope.
It's gotta be the uniform.
Wouldn't it be great if wars could be fought just by the assholes who started them?
You made Mrs. March feel like she could see again. You made Ford believe he was part of something. You give out hope like it was candy in your pocket.
Law one. You will obey orders without question. Law two: Punishment shall be swift. Law three: Mercy is for the weak. Four: Terror will defeat reason. Five: Your allegiance is to the clan. Six: Justice can be dictated. Seven: Any clansman may challenge for leadership of the clan. Law eight: There is only one penalty. Death.
Once more into the breach, my friends, once more. We'll close the wall with our dead. In peace, nothing so becomes a man as modesty and humility, but when the blast of war blows in our ears, then imitate the action of the tiger, summon up the blood, disguise fair nature with rage and lend the eye a terrible aspect.
U.S. Mail... Restored United States... Do these people really believe that ****?
Beautiful isn't it? It took me half a lifetime to invent it. I'm sure you've discovered my deep and abiding interest in pain. Presently I'm writing the definitive work on the subject, so I want you to be totally honest with me on how the machine makes you feel. This being our first try, I'll use the lowest setting.   As you know, the concept of the suction pump is centuries old. Really that's all this is except that instead of sucking water, I'm sucking life. I've just sucked one year of your life away. I might one day go as high as five, but I really don't know what that would do to you. So, let's just start with what we have. What did this do to you? Tell me. And remember, this is for posterity so be honest. How do you feel?  Interesting.
We are men of action, lies do not become us.
Roberts had grown so rich, he wanted to retire. He took me to his cabin and he told me his secret. 'I am not the Dread Pirate Roberts' he said. 'My name is Ryan; I inherited the ship from the previous Dread Pirate Roberts, just as you will inherit it from me. The man I inherited it from is not the real Dread Pirate Roberts either. His name was Cummerbund. The real Roberts has been retired 15 years and living like a king in Patagonia.'
Hello. My name is Inigo Montoya. You killed my father. Prepare to die.
There will be blood tonight!
There's a shortage of perfect ******* in this world. It would be a pity to damage yours.
You must be that little Spanish brat I taught a lesson to all those years ago. You've been chasing me your whole life only to fail now? I think that's about the worst thing I've ever heard.  How marvelous.
I will never love again.
I do not budge; keep your "ho there".
You be careful. People in masks cannot be trusted.
Kill the giant and the dark one, leave the third for questioning.
That was a warning, Highness. Next time my hand flies on its own. Where I come from, there are penalties when a woman lies.
You mocked me once, never do it again! I died that day!
He's right on top of us. I wonder if he is using the same wind we are using.
They're kissing again. Do we have to read the kissing parts?
I do not envy you the headache you will have when you awake. But for now, rest well and dream of large women.
Criminals are as unpredictable as head colds. You never know when you're going to catch one.
We all have occasional failures. Fortunately Dr. Watson never writes about mine.
You have given the reader the distinct impression that I am a misogynist. Actually, I don't dislike women - I merely distrust them. The twinkle in the eye and the arsenic in the soup.
Some of us are cursed with memories like flypaper. Stuck there is a staggering amount of miscellaneous data, most of it useless.
From the sound of your footsteps, I gathered that you were not in a particularly amiable mood.
Thank you, I knew I could con you.
Well you know what they say, 'smile and the world smiles with you'  this man should be in a straight-jacket
Shut up! I'm having a rhetorical conversation!
Sing it out, men! Higher, you animals, higher! We open in Leavenworth Saturday night!
"Springtime for Hitler" a *** romp with Adolf and Eva at Berchtesgaden... Wow!
Ooh, I fell on my keys!
"Congratulations! Hitler will run forever."
Bloom, I'm drowning. Other men sail through life, Bialystock has struck a reef. Bloom, I'm going under. I'm condemned by a society that demands success when all I can offer is failure. Bloom, I'm reaching out to you. Don't send me to prison... HEEELLP!
I'm in pain and I'm wet and I'm still hysterical!
Money is honey! Money is honey!
You have exactly ten seconds to change that look of disgusting pity into one of enormous respect!
How could this happen? I was so careful. I picked the wrong play, the wrong director, the wrong cast. Where did I go right?
Wait! This is a decision that could effect my entire life! I shall have to think about it.  I'll do it.
Springtime for Hitler and Germany.
Lorenzo, baby. Lorenzo St. DuBois. But my friends call me L.S.D.
That's exactly why we want to produce this play. To show the world the true Hitler, the Hitler you loved, the Hitler you knew, the Hitler with a song in his heart.
Let's open up a can of kick *** and kill 'em all, let the paramedics sort 'em out.
Staring defense! Place at the table!
Let's put the women and children to bed and go lookin' for dinner!
Pest! You have any idea how hard it is to get one of those?
Never trust a ******* angel.
God? God is love. I don't love you.
Don't make me call your mother!
Don't let him out. The eagles will snatch him.
Your tea is getting cold!
You know, when you get it wrong, you really get it wrong!
Mister saviour of the Monarchy!
Will someone please save these people from themselves!
Precedent? Where do they find these people?
You don't have the power to upset me. You don't matter enough to upset me.
The notion of secrecy is central to western literature. You may say, the whole idea of character is defined by people holding specific information which for various reasons, sometimes perverse, sometimes noble, they are determined not to disclose.
I'm not frightened. I'm not frightened of anything. The more I suffer, the more I love. Danger will only increase my love. It will sharpen it, forgive its vice. I will be the only angel you need. You will leave life even more beautiful than you entered it. Heaven will take you back and look at you and say: Only one thing can make a soul complete and that thing is love.
I was fifteen. I was coming home from school. I was feeling ill. And a woman helped me.
It doesn't matter what I feel. It doesn't matter what I think. The dead are still dead.
Somebody wanna tell me what in God's name that is?
They've been shaking their *** for two minutes!
According to the Sentinels, it says Ray Smith is - hey, that's weird. No college given, no high school. It just says he's been a resident of the state of Maryland for the last two years and two months, and that he likes to embroider.
I knew this was coming. They were warning us.
If I were God, I would have made the world just so and no different. And so I have you... I have you.
I told the boy when you dream about bad things happening, it means you're still fighting and you're still alive. It's when you start to dream about good things that you should start to worry.
Thank you very ******* much Mr. Mason, you've led us into a room with no exit.
How do ya like how that **** works?
I have a unique knowledge of this prison facility. I was formerly a guest here.
**** it, you're on a need-to-know basis, and you don't need to know.
You made a terrible mistake, and more of our brothers have died in vain. **** you for forcing me into this position.
Mason, the second you don't respect this, it kills you.
I said hey listen to me. Stay sane inside insanity, but he locked the door and threw away the key.
Don't dream it, be it.
Science fiction... double feature/Frank has built and... lost his creature/Darkness has conquered... Brad and Janet/The servants gone to... a distant planet/Whoa-oh-oh-ohh/At the late-night... double feature... picture show/I wanna go/Ah-ohh/To the late-night... double feature... picture show.
Touch-a touch-a touch-a touch me / I wanna be dirty! Chill me, thrill me, fulfill me / Creature of the night!
My vheels! My god, I can't move my vheels!
I'm just a sweet transvestite, from Transsexual Transylvania.
I'll tell you once, I won't tell you twice, you better wise up, Janet Weiss. Your apple pie don't taste too nice. You better wise up, Janet Weiss.
We've got to get out of this trap! Before this... decadence... saps our wills. I've got to be strong, und try to... hang on! Or else, my mind may well *snap*! Und my life... will be lived...  for ze *thrills*...
I would like, if I may, to take you on a strange journey.
Oh, slowly, slowly! It's too nice a job to rush.
Science fiction... double feature/Dr. X... will build a creature/See androids fighting... Brad and Janet... Anne Francis stars in..."Forbidden Planet"/Whoa-oh-oh-ohh/At the late-night double feature picture show
Give yourself over to absolute pleasure. Swim the warm waters of sins of the flesh - erotic nightmares beyond any measure, and sensual daydreams to treasure forever. Can't you just see it? Don't dream it, be it.
There's a light, over at the Frankenstein place.
"Emotion: Agitation or disturbance of mind; vehement or excited mental state." It is also a powerful and irrational master. And from what Magenta and Columbia eagerly viewed on their television monitor, there seemed little doubt that Janet was indeed... its slave.
Because I've seen blue skies, through the tears in my eyes. And I realize, I'm going home.
The master is not yet married, nor do I think he ever will be.
Whatever happened to Fay Wray / That delicate satin-draped frame / As it clung to her thigh / How I started to cry / 'Cause I wanted to be dressed just the same.
And crawling, on the planet's face, some insects, called the human race. Lost in time, and lost in space... and meaning.
My God! I can't stand any more of this! First you spurn me for Eddie, and then you throw him off like an old overcoat for Rocky! You chew people up and then you spit them out again... I loved you... do you hear me? I loved you! And what did it get me? Yeah, I'll tell you: a big nothing. You're like a sponge. You take, take, take, and drain others of their love and emotion. Yeah, well, I've had enough You're gonna choose between me and Rocky, so named after the rocks in his head!
Hi, my name is Brad Majors, and this is my fiancee, Janet Weiss; ah... you are...?
One from the vaults... Don't be upset. It was a mercy killing. He had a certain naive charm, but no muscle.
Hot patootie, bless my soul! I really love that rock n' roll!
I'm lucky, he's lucky, we're all lucky!
Dammit, Janet, I love you.
But a deltoid and a bicep. A hot groin and a tricep makes me... ooo... shake! Makes me wanna take Charles Atlas by the hand.
You're not listening!
Did you bring the plastic men?
A man will say just about anything when he's sportin' badger-food for a ******.
Figure a man's only good for one oath at a time; I took mine to the Confederate States of America.
Well, Reverend, that tears it! From now on, you stay out of this. All of ya. I don't want you with me. I don't need ya for what I got to do.
I tell you young lady. When a thing likes this comes up you got to go to the police. What do you think people pay taxes for? It ain't just to keep us chasing after crooks and regulating traffic. We're suppose to help everybody. Now, you got to go to the police about your sister, Miss.
One can take either staircase. I prefer the left. The sinister side.
You're not a tipsomaniac at your age?
As a man you distrust me. Perhaps you can believe me as a physician
I'm a terrible failure Mary. A book clerk by day, a poet by night. Not a very good one. But if you'll trust me, in this one thing I won't fail. I'll find your sister.
I feel like an idiot fainting in a stranger's office.
Your sister had many friends, but they weren't my friends. I was only the manager of her plant.
I'm sorry, I don't practice anymore. I find it easier to write about mental illness and leave the cure to others.
He was a kind little man in his way. I made him go down that hall into the darkness. I made him do it.
My dear, we were intimate. The times we use to have together! I bet she never told you about that - you're too young.
So I'm backing out the door, right, and I got the TV, like this; it was a big old thing, I couldn't see ****; suddenly I hear this voice, "Police, kid, hands in the air." You know, I was standing there, holdin' on to that TV, so finally the voice says, "You hear what I said, boy?" And I say, "Yes sir, I sure did, but if I drop this ******* thing you got me on destruction of property too."
I don't know; every man has his breaking point.
Forty years I been asking permission to ****. I can't squeeze a drop without say-so.
Red, I do believe you're talking out of your ***.
Two things never happened again after that. The Sisters never laid a finger on Andy again... and Boggs never walked again. They transferred him to a minimum security hospital upstate. To my knowledge, he lived out the rest of his days drinking his food through a straw.
Dufresne? Get your *** out here, boy! You're holding up the show!  Don't make me come down there now! I'll thump your skull for you!  Dufresne, dammit, you're putting me behind! You better be sick or dead in there, I **** you not!  Oh my Holy God.
Well, if it was a toothbrush I wouldn't ask questions, I'd just quote a price, but then a toothbrush is a non-lethal object, isn't it?
I understand you're a man who knows how to get things.
Dear Warden, You were right. Salvation lies within.
If I hear so much as a mouse **** in here the rest of the night I swear by God and sonny Jesus you will all visit the infirmary. Every last ************ in here.
You could argue he'd done it to curry favor with the guards. Or, maybe make a few friends among us cons. Me, I think he did it just to feel normal again, if only for a short while.
Andy Dufresne - who crawled through a river of **** and came out clean on the other side.
I could see why some of the boys took him for snobby. He had a quiet way about him, a walk and a talk that just wasn't normal around here. He strolled, like a man in a park without a care or a worry in the world, like he had on an invisible coat that would shield him from this place. Yeah, I think it would be fair to say... I liked Andy from the start.
What is your malfunction, you fat barrel of monkey spunk?
You're gonna look real funny sucking my **** with no teeth.
One day, when I have a long gray beard and two or three marbles rollin' around upstairs, they'll let me out.
The man likes to play chess; let's get him some rocks.
I ain't seen such a sorry lookin' heap o' maggot **** in all my life.
I'd like to think that the last thing that went through his head, other than that bullet, was to wonder how the **** Andy Dufresne ever got the best of him.
Son, six wardens have been through here in my tenure, and I've learned one immutable, universal truth: Not one of them born whose ******* wouldn't pucker up tighter than a snare drum when you ask them for funds.
Lord! It's a miracle! Man up and vanished like a **** in the wind!
I must admit I didn't think much of Andy first time I laid eyes on him; looked like a stiff breeze would blow him over. That was my first impression of the man.
His first night in the joint, Andy Dufresne cost me two packs of cigarettes. He never made a sound.
I and others have come to a believe, that your heart is not in this, that you don't have the belly for it.
Do you have the slightest idea what a moral and ethical principle is? Do you?
Come play with us, Danny.
It's amazing how fast you get used to such a big place. I tell you, when we first came up here I thought it was kinda scary.
You son of a *****! You did this to him, didn't you! How could you! How could you!
Danny isn't here, Mrs. Torrance.
The police thought that it was what the old-timers used to call cabin fever. A kind of claustrophobic reaction which can occur when people are shut in together over long periods of time.
Here's to five miserable months on the wagon, and all the irreparable harm it has caused me.
Tony, I'm scared.  Remember what Mr. Hallorann said. It's just like pictures in a book, Danny. It isn't real.
I can't get out! I can't get out! Run! Run!
Hi, Lloyd. Little slow tonight, isn't it? HAHAHAHA!
Wendy, you've got a big surprise coming to you. You're not going anywhere.
I'll just set my bourbon and advocaat down right there.
Great party, isn't it?
Hi, I've got an appointment with Mr. Ullman. My name is Jack Torrance.
Larry, just between you and me, we got a very serious problem with the people taking care of the place. They turned out to be completely unreliable assholes.
I never laid a hand on them.
You don't have the sense God gave a doughnut, do you?
Twelve hours after the President gives the order we can be on the ground. One light infantry division of 10,700 men, elements of the Rapid Deployment Force, Special Forces, Delta, APCs, helicopters, tanks and of course the ubiquitous M-16 A2 assault rifle. A humble enough weapon until you see it in the hands of a man outside your local bowling alley or 7-11. It will be noisy, it will be scary and it will not be mistaken for a VFW parade.
I tend to be suspicious of all true believers. Present company included.
We're the CIA, something always goes wrong.
You think I want to lose them? You think I'm in the losing people business, huh?
The Army is a broad sword, not a scalpel. Trust me, senator - you do not want the Army in an American city.
Hub, I think we're all eager to give our weekends up on this, I know I am... but it just occurs to me, has any one committed a crime here? I mean, assault with a deadly color...?
It's easy to tell the difference between right and wrong. What's hard is choosing the wrong that's more right.
In this game, the most committed wins.
You don't fight a junkyard dog with ASPCA rules. What you do is you take the leash off your bigger, meaner dog.
Make no mistake, Senator. We will hunt down the enemy, we will find the enemy, and we will kill the enemy. And no card-carrying member of the ACLU is more dead set against it than I am. Which is why I urge you - I implore you. Do not consider this as an option.
You were keeping her sick.
Look at my face; I was not thinking anything bad about you.
Silence, village idiot!
Stop looking at me. I don't like people looking at me like that.
I want to tell you my secret now.
Look at my face; I'm not very mad.
Anna Crowe, I am in love... in love I am.
I thought you meant the other Italian restaurant I asked you to marry me in.
I would like some wine in a glass, I would not like it in a mug, I would not like it in a jug.
De profundis clamo ad te, domine.
I'm ready to communicate with you now.
Do you know why you're afraid when you're alone? I do. I do.
I thought Tommy Tammisimo sucked big time.
I think I'm okay really. I think it just went in and out. I... It doesn't even hurt anymore.
Did he have wavy hair and chestnut eyes?
If you could change something in your life, anything at all, what would it be?
Stuttering Stanley! Stuttering Stanley! Stuttering Stanley!
I didn't know you were funny.
Hey, come on! I'll show you where my dad keeps his gun. Come on!
You can't hurt me anymore!
Sorry I'm late. I was taking a ****.
Luther said I could learn some things from you. I already know how to drink.
You're right, Henry. It's not enough. But  it's close!
Sit down and shut up, will ya? Try not to live up to all my expectations.
I did not have to go as far as I was prepared to go, but I was prepared to go all the way.
You'd make a good poker player, kid.
Waiter, will you serve the nuts? I mean, will you serve the guests the nuts?
Now don't make a move or that dog will tear you to shreds.
The murderer is right in this room. Sitting at this table. You may serve the fish.
Oh, Nicky, I love you because you know such lovely people.
Haven't you heard the news? I'm a gentleman now!
What's that man doing in my drawers?
I just cannot believe any of this voodoo ********!
Anybody touches me, and we go!
I was wonderin' when El Capitan was gonna get a chance to use his popgun.
I dunno what the hell's in there, but it's weird and ****** off, whatever it is.
I know you gentlemen have been through a lot, but when you find the time, I'd rather not spend the rest of this winter TIED TO THIS ******* COUCH!
Maybe we're at war with Norway?
You guys gonna listen to Garry? You gonna let him give the orders? I mean, he could BE one of those things!
I'd make comic faces... and stand on my head and grin at you between my legs... and tell all sorts of jokes. I wouldn't stand a chance, would I?
You know, you ought to get yourself a girl.
We should have dug deeper than a grave.
Don't be so gloomy. After all it's not that awful. Like the fella says, in Italy for 30 years under the Borgias they had warfare, terror, murder, and bloodshed, but they produced Michelangelo, Leonardo da Vinci, and the Renaissance. In Switzerland they had brotherly love - they had 500 years of democracy and peace, and what did that produce? The cuckoo clock. So long Holly.
That's a nice girl, that. But she ought to go careful in Vienna. Everybody ought to go careful in a city like this.
He is now  in ****, or  in heaven.
A person doesn't change just because you find out more.
Come D'Artagnan, we're saving the King!
A truly remarkable woman. The most beautiful I have ever known. And the deadliest... which would explain my attraction.
There was a time when I would have given my life for a kind word from you.
By joint edict of His Majesty King Louis XIII and His Eminence Cardinal Richelieu, the Musketeers are officially disbanded. In preparation for the coming war with England, your ranks and commissions are hereby transferred to the Infantry. You will be contacted and told where to report. Until that time, you are instructed to return to your homes.
The King's life is in danger. We have work to do.
That's it. Next time you drive.
When I speak of time, I'm speaking of the fourth dimension.
We've become bored with watching actors give us phony emotions. We are tired of pyrotechnics and special effects. While the world he inhabits is, in some respects, counterfeit, there's nothing fake about Truman himself. No scripts, no cue cards. It isn't always Shakespeare, but it's genuine. It's a life.
Back when I was picking beans in Guatemala, we used to make fresh coffee, right off the trees I mean. That was good. This is **** but, hey, I'm in a police station.
There's nothing that can't be done.
What about it, pretzel man, what's your story?
You give me one good reason why I shouldn't kill you right now.
It's not payback! It's precaution. You want payback? You wanna run? I don't care! I'm not doing this for Fenster, I'm not doing it for you... I'm doing it for me. I'm gonna finish this thing. This Kobayashi ******* is not gonna stand on me!
Can you hear me in the back? Hello?
The way I hear it, Soze is some kind of butcher. A peerless, psycho, ******-up butcher.
First day on the job, you know what I learned? How to spot a murderer. Let's say you arrest three guys for the same killing. You put them all in jail overnight. The next morning, whoever's sleeping is your man. You see, if you're guilty, you know you're caught, you get some rest, you let your guard down.
I'll probably **** blood tonight.
It didn't make sense that I'd be there. I mean, these guys were hard-core hijackers, but there I was. At that point I wasn't scared, I knew I hadn't done anything they could do me for. Besides, it was fun. I got to make like I was notorious.
He was dead just long enough for the murder rap to blow over. And then he had lunch.
Get your rest, Gentlemen. The boat will be ready for you on Friday. If I see you or any of your friends before then, Miss. Finneran will find herself the victim of a most gruesome violation before she dies. As will your father, Mr. Hockney. and your Uncle Randall in Arizona, Mr. Kint. I might only castrate Mr. McManus's nephew, David. Do I make myself clear?
Why are you just standing there, you idiot? I'm not speaking English am I? Wouldn't it make sense to find someone who could talk to me so you could find the person that set me on fire, perhaps? He is the Devil. You've never seen anyone like Keyser Soze in all your miserable life, you idiot. Keyser Soze. Do you at least understand that? Keyser Soze. The Devil himself. Or are you American policemen so stupid that you haven't even heard of him? Keyser Soze, you ridiculous man. KEYSER SOZE.
There's no ******* coke.
Keaton always said, "I don't believe in God, but I'm afraid of him." Well I believe in God, and the only thing that scares me is Keyser Soze.
I just can't believe we're going to walk into certain death.
It was Keyser Soze, Agent Kujan. I mean the Devil himself. How do you shoot the Devil in the back? What if you miss?
McManus came to us with the job, Fenster got the vans, Hockney supplied the hardware, I came through with how to do it so no one got killed, but Keaton... Keaton put on the finishing touch. A little '**** you' from the five of us to the NYPD.
If I told you the Loch Ness monster hired me to hit the harbor, what would you say?
After the operation, when that poor girl she went into a coma, Dr. Towler called me in. He told me that he'd had five difficult deliveries in a row and he was tired... and he never looked at the admittance form. And he told me to change the form. He told me to change the '1' to a '9'... or else... or else he said, he said he'd fire me. He said I'd never work again. Who were these men? Who were these men? I wanted to be a nurse!
I know how you feel. You don't believe me, but I do know. I'm going to tell you something that I learned when I was your age. I'd prepared a case and old man White said to me, "How did you do?" And, uh, I said, "Did my best." And he said, "You're not paid to do your best. You're paid to win." And that's what pays for this office... pays for the pro bono work that we do for the poor... pays for the type of law that you want to practice... pays for my whiskey... pays for your clothes... pays for the leisure we have to sit back and discuss philosophy as we're doing tonight. We're paid to win the case. You finished your marriage. You wanted to come back and practice the law. You wanted to come back to the world. Welcome back.
You know, so much of the time we're just lost. We say, "Please, God, tell us what is right; tell us what is true." And there is no justice: the rich win, the poor are powerless. We become tired of hearing people lie. And after a time, we become dead... a little dead. We think of ourselves as victims... and we become victims. We become... we become weak. We doubt ourselves, we doubt our beliefs. We doubt our institutions. And we doubt the law. But today you are the law. You ARE the law. Not some book... not the lawyers... not the, a marble statue... or the trappings of the court. See those are just symbols of our desire to be just. They are... they are, in fact, a prayer: a fervent and a frightened prayer. In my religion, they say, "Act as if ye had faith... and faith will be given to you." IF... if we are to have faith in justice, we need only to believe in ourselves. And ACT with justice. See, I believe there is justice in our hearts.
You guys... you guys are all the same! The doctors at the hospital, you... it's always what I'm going to do for you. And then you ***** up, and it's, "Ah, we did the best that we could, I'm dreadfully sorry." And people like us live with your mistakes the rest of our lives.
You know you guys are all the same. You don't care who gets hurt. You're a bunch of ******. You'd do anything for a dollar. You got no loyalty... No nothing... You're a bunch of ******.
This case should never have come to trial. But you know better. You're mister independent. You want to be independent? Be independent now. I have no sympathy for you.
Don't Worry. I'll keep my pants on.
Nothing that a bottle of Jack and a straight razor won't fix.
Mom, this is so not the time to be yourself.
I look like a total wanker, don't I?
The only thing that you two have in common is that you're both secretly attracted to me.
Oh sweet Jesus, who gave that woman an amp?
Well thank you for including me in this timeless feminine ritual. Here's to the husbands who've won you, the losers who've lost you, and the lucky ******** who've yet to meet you.
The Wedding Dance is a timeless ritual... Surrounded by a group of family and friends. Watching, smiling, taking bets on how long it's going to last. All your have is each other and whatever skills you aquire today.
I'd rather fight with you than make love with anyone else.
Wait a minute! You're telling me that *if* something happened last night I would have to pay you $1700! That's a down payment on a Ford Focus!
Let me teach you a trick: if you look people in the eye, they won't notice what you're wearing.
Go ahead, Kat, hate me. I think you're running out of steam on this whole Jeffrey thing anyhow. Maybe now you'll be able to hold on to this long enough to ruin your next relationship.
If they move, kill 'em!
Pike; "I wouldn't have it any other way", *either*!
Well, how'd you like to kiss my sister's black cat's ***?
What I like, and what I need, are two different things.
Do not drink wine or strong drink, thou, nor thy sons with thee, least ye shall die. Look not though upon the wine when it is red, and when it bringeth his color in the cup, when it moveth itself aright at the last, it biteth like a serpent and stingeth like an adder. Now folks, that's from the Good Book, but in this here town it's five cents a glass.
We all dream of being a child again, even the worst of us. Perhaps the worst most of all.
What would you do with a brain if you had one?
Oh, but anyway, Toto, we're home. Home! And this is my room, and you're all here. And I'm not gonna leave here ever, ever again, because I love you all, and - oh, Auntie Em - there's no place like home!
As Coroner I must aver, I thoroughly examined her, and she's not only merely dead, she's really most sincerely dead.
Professor Marvel never guesses, he knows!
Unusual weather we're having, ain't it?
How about a little fire, Scarecrow?
Where do you want to be oiled first?
Put 'em up, put 'em up! Which one of you first? I'll fight you both together if you want. I'll fight you with one paw tied behind my back. I'll fight you standing on one foot. I'll fight you with my eyes closed... ohh, pullin' an axe on me, eh? Sneaking up on me, eh? Why, I'll... Ruff!
Better get under cover, Sylvester. There's a storm blowin' up - a whopper, to speak in the vernacular of the peasantry. Poor little kid, I hope she gets home all right.
She isn't coming yet, Toto. Did she hurt you? She tried to, didn't she? Come on. We'll go tell Uncle Henry and Auntie Em.
Ring around the rosie, a pocket full of spears! Thought you were pretty foxy, didn't you? Well! The last to go will see the first three go before her! And your mangy little dog, too!
Why, anybody can have a brain. That's a very mediocre commodity. Every pusillanimous creature that crawls on the Earth or slinks through slimy seas has a brain. Back where I come from, we have universities, seats of great learning, where men go to become great thinkers. And when they come out, they think deep thoughts and with no more brains than you have. But they have one thing you haven't got: a diploma.
My! People come and go so quickly here!
You cursed brat! Look what you've done! I'm melting! melting! Oh, what a world! What a world! Who would have thought a good little girl like you could destroy my beautiful wickedness? Oooooh, look out! I'm going! Oooooh! Ooooooh!
Come on, everybody to the storm cellar!
A heart is not judged by how much you love; but by how much you are loved by others.
Do not arouse the wrath of the great and powerful Oz. I said come back tomorrow.
Orders are nobody can see the Great Oz! Not nobody, not nohow!
Back where I come from there are men who do nothing all day but good deeds. They are called phila... er, phila... er, yes, er, Good Deed Doers.
Almira Gulch, just because you own half the county doesn't mean that you have the power to run the rest of us. For twenty-three years, I've been dying to tell you what I thought of you! And now... well, being a Christian woman, I can't say it!
Pay no attention to that man behind the curtain.
I am the great and powerful... ... Wizard of Oz.
Lions, and tigers, and bears! Oh, my!
I can barely hear my heart beating!
To confer, converse, and otherwise hob-nob with my brother wizards.
You are talking to a man who has laughed in the face of death, sneered at doom and chuckled at catastrophe. I was petrified.
Read what my medal says: "Courage". Ain't it the truth? Ain't it the truth?
I think I'll miss you most of all.
What a nice little dog. And you, my dear, what an unexpected pleasure. It's so kind of you to want to visit me in my loneliness.
Shucks, folks, I'm speechless. Ha Ha!
You have no power here! Begone, before somebody drops a house on you, too!
I've got a witch mad at me and you might get into trouble!
Only bad witches are ugly.
Uncommon beauty is commonly overlooked.
James! You can't kill me! Not in cold blood!
She's waiting for you.
There's no point living, if you can't feel alive.
One tires of being executed.
Mulder I can't tell you what killed this man. I'm not sure if anybody else can, either.
Trust no one, Mr. Mulder.
I need this building evacuated and cleared out in ten minutes. I need you to get on the phone and tell the fire department to block off the city center in a one mile radius around the building. DON'T THINK! JUST PICK UP THE PHONE AND MAKE IT HAPPEN!
But you saved me. As difficult and frustrating as it's been sometimes, your God-****** strict rationalism and science have saved me a thousand times over. You kept me honest. You made me a whole person. I owe you everything, and you owe me nothing. I don't know if I want to do this alone. I don't even know if I can.
I don't believe the FBI currently has an investigative unit qualified to pursue the evidence in hand.
Maybe we should call in a bomb threat to Houston. I think it's free beer night at the Astrodome.
And why do you think you're here talking to me today? These people don't make mistakes!
I swear 3 days ago neither one of us would've EVER pulled a stunt like this, but if you'd ever meet my husband you'd understand why.
In the future, when a woman is crying like that, she isn't having any fun.
Louise, no matter what happens, I'm glad I came with you.
You let her go, you ******' *******, or I'm gon' splatter your ugly face all over this nice car!
Certain words and phrases just keep drifting through my mind, things like, incarceration, cavity search, death by electrocution, life in prison, **** like that, know what I'm sayin', so do I want to come out alive...
Well, I've always believed that if done properly, armed robbery doesn't have to be an unpleasant experience.
Well, we're not in the middle of nowhere, but we can see it from here.
If she calls, just be gentle, you know? Like you're really happy to hear from her. Like you miss her. Women love that ****.
You've always been crazy, this is just the first chance you've had to express yourself.
Come on, Louise, don't blow it.
Have you seen my baseball?
Your gonna pay, ******.
The last time I had a pap smear, the guy needed leather gloves and an oyster shucker.
When I was 16 years old, I fell in love.
We agreed I wouldn't **** you, and you wouldn't **** me until we got this ****  outta the ******' picture!
I couldn't believe that she knew my name. Some of my best friends didn't know my name.
You are in the courtroom of world opinion and you can answer yes or no.
The sun came up. Every day the sun comes up says something about us.
They're being issued identity cards. When the call comes, the evacuation officers meet them at pre-arranged departure areas. They go by helicopter to Mount Weather; we meet them there... Of course, that's for morale. Missiles only take five minutes to get here.
I want to ask you one simple question Mr Ambassador. Do you deny that the Soviet Union has placed and is placing missiles in Cuba? Don't wait for the translation, yes or no?
We were eyeball to eyeball and I think the other fella just blinked.
We've got a bunch of smart guys. We lock 'em in a room and kick 'em in the *** until they come up with some solutions... I'll do it.
I'll whistle up some luck for you.
Those goddamn Kennedys are gonna destroy this country if we don't do something about this!
I'll tell you one thing, Kenny. Those brass hats have one big advantage. That is, if we do what they want us to do, there's none of us gonna be alive to tell them they were wrong.
We've worked up several military scenarios; before I ask General Taylor to take us through the various options, I'd like for us to adopt a rule: If we decide to strike, we must agree now to do it *before* the missiles become operational, because once they are I don't think we can guarantee getting them all before at least... at least some of them are launched.
*I* have the authority! I am the commander in chief of the United States, and I say when we go to war!
If the sun comes up tomorrow, it is only because of men of good will. And that's - that's all there is between us and the devil.
You're a good man; your brother is a good man. I assure you there are other good men. Let us hope the will of good men is enough to counter the terrible strength of this thing that was put in motion.
Gentlemen, for the last fifteen years, I've fought at this table alongside your predecessors in the struggle against the Soviet. Now I do not wish to seem melodramatic, but I do wish to impress upon you a lesson I learned with bitter tears and great sacrifice. The Soviet understands only one language: action. Respects only one word: force.
Mr. President, you give me the order right now, my planes will be ready to carry out the air strikes in three days time. All you gotta do is say "go," and my boys will get those Red ********.
Sleep is for the weak Mr. President.
Jesus, I... I feel like we caught the *** carrier steaming for Pearl Harbor.
Call me Irish, but I don't believe in cooler heads prevailing.
Mr. President, the motto I chose for SAC is "Peace is Our Profession." Now, God forbid we find ourselves in a nuclear exchange, but, if launched, those missiles from Cuba would kill a lot of Americans. The very presence of those missiles gives the Soviets first-strike capability. Those missiles make a nuclear exchange more likely, and that is why I'm being such a pain in the *** about destroying them, and destroying them immediately.
This is not a blockade. This is language. A new vocabulary, the likes of which the world has never seen! This is President Kennedy communicating with Secretary Khrushchev!
Let's hope appeasement doesn't run in families. I fear weakness does.
Well, gentlemen, if anybody's got any great ideas, now's the time.
If they want this goddamn job, they can have it. It's no great joy to me.
Yeah, you pull that hot shot stuff around me, and I'll break every bone in your goddamn body. You understand me? Yeah, you're in for a change, mister, a whole 'nother ball game.
You can get it doggy-style or you can get it laying on your side. Those are your only choices. This is my house and I get to say. Got it?
Only me on this whole Earth to straighten you out, and I will do it, kill or cure. Kill or cure.
Here I am, you lucky people!
You don't know it yet, but me and Concrete are in your blood. We'll make a man of you yet. In years to come you'll thank me. You'll remember me... me and Concrete!
Well... You can want in one hand and **** in the other, and see which one fills first.
What about me? What about me? When is it ever Dwight's turn for some consideration? What about me? I'll tell you one thing: You'll remember me!
I don't believe that ****, you know, I believe there is such a thing as a bad boy, bad clear through. It's gonna be my job to set you straight. That's right, to kill or cure. Kill or cure!
Why, I'm so scared, I'm so scared, I'm so scared, wo-o-o!
You left the cap off the toothpaste again.
That's what makes S.F. so badass; we got the best flashlights.
You know you're on the path to truth when you smell ****, isn't that what they say?
You are all under arrest, you're getting court-martialed and you're gonna show us that bullion.
Hey, I don't know if I can do this. I got a family. If I'm gonna **** in a bag for the rest of my life because I got shot after the war was over, that would pretty ******* stupid wouldn't it, Major?
Great! A ******' tank! That should send us on our way.
Didn't think I'd get to see anybody get shot in this war.
Don't make me smoke your ***, Abdul!
Come on up and watch TV.
Well, well, well, the Washington Redskin.
Everything will be all right. You are in my hands. I am here to protect you. You have nowhere to go. You have nowhere to go.
How shall the new environment be programmed? It all happened so slowly that most men failed to realize that anything had happened at all.
Congratulations. You've just made your first ticker.
We're not violent people, Michael. It pains us to pain you.
Does my inner child need a spanking?
Greatness courts failure.
Oh, you amuse me, Roy, but I'm the only woman in America born after World War II that thinks astrology's a crock of ****.
It's a lock! I hit my 7-iron like John Daly hits the 3.
That's because you think of it as transportation, Boone. Think of it as bragging rights. Think of yourself sitting around the bar, crowing to your cronies about the Cadillac you won from me. They'll forget all about the Winnebago you lost to me.
Why do men always insist on measuring their dicks?
Are you a Lunatic? Are you tellin' me that you didn't see me comin' out of this lot? There's a red light there for cryin' out loud! You're supposed to stop!
It's been 84 years, and I can still smell the fresh paint. The china had never been used. The sheets had never been slept in. Titanic was called the Ship of Dreams, and it was. It really was.
If this is the direction the rats are going that's fine with me!
Well, the boy's a hero then! Good for you, son. Well done.
26 years of experience working against him. He figures anything big enough to sink the ship they're gonna see in time to turn. The ship's too big with too small a rudder. It doesn't corner worth a ****. Everything he knows is wrong.
We are the luckiest sons of ******* in the world, you know that?
So, you wanna go to a real party?
What? Do you think a first class girl can't drink?
That's one of the good things about Paris: lots of girls willing to take their clothes off.
I'm sorry that I didn't build you a stronger ship, young Rose.
Music to drown by. Now I know I'm in first class.
I saw my whole life as if I'd already lived it. An endless parade of parties and cotillions, yachts and polo matches. Always the same narrow people, the same mindless chatter. I felt like I was standing at a great precipice, with no one to pull me back, no one who cared... or even noticed.
That's John Jacob Astor, the richest man on the ship. His little wifey there, Madeline, is my age and in a delicate condition. See how she's trying to hide it?
I don't know about you, but I intend to write a strongly worded letter to the White Star Line about all of this.
God! Look at that thing! You would've gone straight to the bottom.
Gentlemen. It has been a privilege playing with you tonight.
You shine up like a new penny.
Wait a second. You were going to kill youself by jumping off of the Titanic?  All you had to do was wait two days!
Take her to sea, Mr. Murdoch. Let's stretch her legs.
That's the last time I ever saw him. He married, of course. And inherited his millions. But the crash of '29 hit his interests hard, and he put a pistol in his mouth that year. Or so I read.
I'll never let go, Jack. I promise.
Ah, forget it, boyo. You're as like to have angels fly out your **** as get next to the likes of her.
Dive six, here we are again on the deck of Titanic. Two and a half miles down. Three-thousand, eight hundred and twenty-one meters. The pressure outside is three-and-a-half tons per square inch. These windows are nine inches thick, and if they go, it's sayonara in two micro-seconds.
The last thing I need is another picture of me looking like a porcelain doll.
Rose is displeased... what to do?
This was mine. How extraordinary! And it looks the same as it did last time I saw it... The reflection's changed a bit.
I can see the Statue of Liberty already!... Very small, of course.
Incredible. There's Smith and he's standing there and he's got the iceberg warning in his ******* hand, excuse me, his hand, and he's ordering more speed.
I will do this with or without your help, sir, but without, it will take longer.
No, thank you. We are dressed in our best and are prepared to go down as gentlemen. But, we would like a brandy.
Fifteen-hundred people went into the sea, when Titanic sank from under us. There were twenty boats floating nearby... and only one came back. One. Six were saved from the water, myself included. Six... out of fifteen-hundred. Afterward, the seven-hundred people in the boats had nothing to do but wait... wait to die... wait to live... wait for an absolution... that would never come.
Sleep soundly young Rose for I have built you a good ship, strong and true, she's all the lifeboats you need.
I saw that in a nickelodeon once and I always wanted to do it.
You gonna cut her meat for her too there, Cal?
Goodnight Dark Prince.
There is no place for excuses when you are the LEADER!
This night just keeps getting better.
I want your blood. And I want your souls. And I want them both right now!
It would appear that the strain was more than he could bear.
It's true, you are a good woman. Then again, you may be the antichrist.
Fight's commenced! Get to fightin' or get away!
Maybe poker's just not your game, Ike. I know: let's have a spelling contest.
And so she walked out of our lives forever.
You die first, get it? Your friends might get me in a rush, but not before I make your head into a canoe, you understand me?
I'm your huckleberry...
Nonsense, I have not yet begun to defile myself.
Forgive me if I don't shake hands.
I don't think I'll let you arrest us today, Behan.
Why Johnny Ringo, you look like somebody just walked over your grave.
Sheriff, allow me to present a pair of fellow sophisticates. Turkey Creek Jack Johnson and Texas Jack Vermillion. Mind your ear, Creek.
Why Ed does this mean we're not friends anymore? You know Ed, if I thought you weren't my friend... I just don't think I could bear it!
I stand corrected, Wyatt. You're an oak.
You gonna do somethin'? Or are you just gonna stand there and bleed?
Mr Stamper, would you please kill those ********!
Can't you people keep anything locked up?
That son of a ***** cut me off!
Gutsiest move I ever saw, Mav.
That was some of the best flying I've seen to date - right up to the part where you got killed.
Ages three and up! It's on my box! Ages three and up! I'm not supposed to be babysitting Princess Drool!
I knew you were right all along, Woody. Never doubted you for a second.
Pull my string! The birthday party's today? Okay everybody, the coast is clear!
Years of Academy training wasted.
Yes, sir, we're next month's garage sale fodder for sure.
I wanna ride the pony...
No-one has ever attempted a double bypass brain transplant before.
I don't believe that man's ever been to medical school!
I think you've had enough tea for today, let's get you outta here, Buzz.
That's *Mister* Potato Head to you, you back stabbing murderer!
Great! Now I have guilt!
"Extremely dangerous. Keep out of reach of children." Cool! What am I gonna blow?
Son of a building block! It's Woody!
Wait a minute, I just lit a rocket... Rockets explode!
I have been chosen! Farewell, my friends. I go on to a better place.
What a spaceport!  Good work, Woody.
To infinity, and beyond!
Hey, look! It's Woody and Buzz, comin' up fast!
What if Andy gets another dinosaur? A mean one? I just don't think I can take that kind of rejection!
Mrs. Potato Head, Mrs. Potato Head, Mrs. Potato Head... hey, I can dream, can't I?
How dare you open a space man's helmet on an uncharted planet? My eyeballs could have been sucked from their sockets!
Did you all take stupid pills this morning? Have you forgotten what he did to Buzz?
I have a job for you but I don't have much time.
Now get out of the car and shoot him in the head!
On the good days, I feel like I get it, like it all makes sense. I can stay in the moment, I don't have to control everything in the future, and I believe everything is gonna work out fine. On the bad days I just want to grab the phone and start dialing numbers. I want to pull my hair and run through the streets screaming. But thanks to the people I've met in these rooms, like Margaret and Jim and Sarah, I'm pretty sure I'm gonna make it through today.
If there is a war on drugs, then many of our family members are the enemy. And I don't know how you wage war on your own family.
It seems, however, I really am the luckiest guy in the world. Several years of addiction right in the middle of an epidemic, surrounded by the living dead. But not me. I'm negative. It's official. And once the pain goes away, that's when the real battle starts. Depression, boredom... You feel so ******* low, you want to ******* top yourself.
It was ******' obvious that that **** was gonnae **** some ****.
Ursula Andress, the quintessential Bond girl. That's what everyone says. The embodiment of his superiority over us. Beautiful, exotic, highly sexual and totally unavaiable to anyone apart from him. Shite. Let's face it. She can shag one punter from Edinburgh, she'd shag the whole lot of us.
I don't feel the sickness yet, but it's in the post. That's for sure. I'm in the junkie limbo at the moment. Too ill to sleep. Too tired to stay awake, but the sickness is on its way. Sweat, chills, nausea. Pain and craving. A need like nothing else I've ever known will soon take hold of me. It's on its way.
Thank you, your honor. With God's help I'll conquer this terrible affliction.
We called him Mother Superior on account of the length of his habit.
Phew! I haven't felt that good since Archie Gemmill scored against Holland in 1978!
Now I've justified this to myself in all sorts of ways. It wasn't a big deal, just a minor betrayal. Or we'd outgrown each other, you know, that sort of thing. But let's face it, I ripped them off - my so called mates. But Begbie, I couldn't give a **** about him. And Sick Boy, well he'd done the same to me, if he'd only thought of it first. And Spud, well okay, I felt sorry for Spud - he never hurt anybody. So why did I do it? I could offer a million answers - all false. The truth is that I'm a bad person. But, that's gonna change - I'm going to change. This is the last of that sort of thing. Now I'm cleaning up and I'm moving on, going straight and choosing life. I'm looking forward to it already. I'm gonna be just like you. The job, the family, the ******* big television. The washing machine, the car, the compact disc and electric tin opener, good health, low cholesterol, dental insurance, mortgage, starter home, leisure wear, luggage, three piece suite, DIY, game shows, junk food, children, walks in the park, nine to five, good at golf, washing the car, choice of sweaters, family Christmas, indexed pension, tax exemption, clearing gutters, getting by, looking ahead, the day you die.
This was to be my final hit, but let's be clear about this. There's final hits and final hits. What kind was this to be?
Heroin had robbed Renton of his *** drive, but now it returned with a vengeance. And as the impotence of those days faded into memory, grim desperation took hold of his ***-crazed mind. His post-junk libido, fuelled by alcohol and amphetamine, taunted him remorselessly with his own unsatisfied desire.
Armed robbery. With a replica. I mean, how the **** can it be armed robbery with a ******* replica?
Heroin makes you constipated. The heroin from my last hit was fading, and the suppositories had yet to melt.  I'm no longer constipated.
Two kilos. What's that, about ten years? Mikey Forrester, Russian sailors, what the **** are you boys on, eh?
Relinquishing junk. Stage one, preparation. For this you will need one room which you will not leave. Soothing music. Tomato soup, ten tins of. Mushroom soup, eight tins of, for consumption cold. Ice cream, vanilla, one large tub of. Magnesia, milk of, one bottle. Paracetamol, mouthwash, vitamins. Mineral water, Lucozade, pornography. One mattress. One bucket for urine, one for ***** and one for vomitus. One television and one bottle of Valium, which I've already procured from my mother, who is, in her own domestic and socially acceptable way also a drug addict. And now I'm ready. All I need is one final hit to soothe the pain while the Valium takes effect.
Well, this is a good ******* laugh, ain't it? You sweat that shite out of your system. 'Cause if I come back and it's still here... I'll ******* kick it out. Okay?
Better than ***, Rents. Better than ***. The ultimate hit. I'm a ******* adult, I can find out for meself. Well I'm finding out all right.
Picture the scene: The other ******' week there, doin' the ******' Volley with Tommy, playing pool. I'm playing like Paul-Fuckin'-Newman by the way. Givin' the boy here the tannin' of a lifetime. So it comes to there, during the last shot, the deciding ball of the whole tournament. I'm on the black and he's sittin' in the corner looking all ******' biscuit-*****. When this hard **** comes in. Obviously ******' fancied himself, like. Starts staring at me. Lookin' at me, right ******' at me, as if to say, "Come ahead, square go." You ken me, I'm not the type of **** that goes looking for ******' bother, like, but at the end of the day I'm the **** with a pool cue and he can get the fat end in his puss any time he ******* wanted like. So I squares up, casual like. What does the hard **** do? Or the so-called hard ****? Shites it. Puts down his drink, turns, and gets the **** out of there. And after that, well, the game was mine.
And with that Mark Renton had fallen in love.
So if you have an appointment elsewhere, I'll excuse you.
Unicron, my master... with this, I shall make you my slave.
Prime did it! He turned the tide!
We've got to get a new travel agent.
We can't hold out forever Kup, but we *can* give them one *humongous* repair bill.
Open, **** it, open! Prime, you said the Matrix would light our darkest hour.
Rumble, Frenzy, Ravage, Ratbat, eject! Operation: interference.
Without the Matrix there is no hope, no hope, no hope, no hope at all...
Behold, Galvatron! And these shall be your minions.  Scourge, the tracker. And his huntsmen, the Sweeps.  Cyclonus, the warrior. And his armada.
First Prime, then Ultra Magnus, and now you. It is a pity you Autobots die so easily, or I might have a sense of satisfaction.
Why settle for a peek, Daniel, when you can see everything from "Lookout Mountain"?
Megatron must be stopped... no matter the cost.
Come on down Autobrat!
And these... shall be your minions.
Their defenses are broken, let the slaughter begin!
It is the year 2005. The treacherous Decepticons have conquered the Autobot's home planet of Cybertron. But, from secret staging grounds on two of Cybertron's moons the valiant Autobots plan to take back their homeland.
I would have waited an eternity for this. It's over, Prime.
It's not hard to knock 'em down, it's getting them to stay down that's the trick!
First we crack the shell, then we crack the nuts inside!
Me, Grimlock, want to munch metal.
Roger me. Wilco me. Anything. Hello. Hello. Earth?
I've got better things to do tonight than die.
Optimus Prime, do you read me? The Decepticons are blitzing Autobot City, we're really taking a pounding. Don't know how much longer we can hold out.
Happy motoring. ****-a-doodle-doo!
I'll rip out your optics!
Me, Grimlock, not "nice dino." Me mash brains!
Me Grimlock not kisser! Me Grimlock king!
Spare me this mockery of justice.
How dare Unicron! Cybertron and all its moons belong to me!
Here's the plan. We don't even stop. Ride like ****. Tonight we keep right on going. We'll walk the horses.
Food for five years, a thousand gallons of gas, air filtration, water filtration, Geiger counter. Bomb shelter! Underground... God **** monsters.
I've got a goddamn plan!
Well, there sure as **** ain't nothing to stop us now... everybody we know between here and Bixbe's already dead.
I wouldn't give you a gun if it were World War 3.
Broke into the wrong God **** rec room, didn't ya you *******!
Well, thanks for everything, you know, saving my life and stuff.
Good morning Mr. Bassett, this is your wake up call. Please move your ***.
What the **** is going on! I mean what the **** is going on!
Run for it? Running's not a plan! Running's what you do, once a plan fails!
Melvin! One of these days someone's gonna kick your ***!
Roger that Burt, and congratulations. Be advised, however, that there are two more, repeat, two more motherhumpers.
I can't believe we said no to free beer!
You little *******! You don't knock it off you're gonna be shittin' this basketball... pardon my French!
I knew you'd escape. They haven't built a circuit that could hold you!
Bring in the logic probe!
Come on, you scuzzy data, be in there. Come on.
I don't know how you survived, slave. Prepare to terminate.
All that is visible must grow beyond itself, and extend into the realm of the invisible.
That M.C.P., that's half our problem right there.
On the other side of the screen, it all looks so easy.
Oh, man, this isn't happening, it only thinks its happening.
Look, just so I can tell my friends, what this dream is about, okay? Where am I?
Same thing happened to me when I played Neil Armstrong in Moonshot. They found me in an alley in Burbank trying to re-enter the earth's atmosphere in an old refrigerator box.
Darling, remember, you are Gaston Monescu. You are a crook. I want you as a crook. I love you as a crook. I worship you as a crook. Steal, swindle, rob. Oh, but don't become one of those useless, good-for-nothing gigolos.
From Geneva comes the news that the famous international crook, Gaston Monescu, robbed the peace conference yesterday. He took practically everything except the peace.
Do you remember the man who walked into the Bank of Constantinople, and walked out with the Bank of Constantinople?
No, no, Francois, I tell you, no. You see, Francois, marriage is a beautiful mistake which two people make together. But with you, Francois, I think it would be a mistake.
Well, I'll leave you alone with that lady. But if you behave like a gentleman, I'll break your neck.
I have a confession to make to you: You like me. In fact, you're crazy about me.
I came here to rob you, but unfortunately I fell in love with you.
I love you. I loved you the minute I saw you. I'm mad about you, my little shoplifter... . my sweet little pickpocket... . my darling.
It must be the most marvelous supper. We may not eat it, but it must be marvelous.
It's in the area of narcotics, Mr. Reynard, that the government tramples on the Fourth Amendment.
Eddie Dodd... everybody should own one.
The last struggle for Constitutional rights is being waged over drugs.
You know, for eight years I've been waiting for some genius to notice it took me an hour to drive seven blocks?
Well, let's not drag the constitution into this.
You know, I haven't gotten stoned once since the trial started.
Those horses can't get away from Little Blackie - they're loaded down with fat men and iron.
What did you expect, Harry? Helen's a flesh and blood woman and you're never there. It was only a matter of time.
So far, this is not blowing my skirt up, gentlemen.
Seconds count buddy. Ditch the *****.
There *is* no us, you psychopathic *****!
Kids - 10 seconds of joy, 30 years of misery.
Same thing happened to me with wife number two, 'member? I have no idea nothing's going on, right? I come home one day and the house is empty, and I mean completely empty. She even took the ice cube trays out of the freezer. What kind of a sick ***** takes the ICE CUBE trays out of the FREEZER?
It's a scale really, with a perfect mission at one end and a total pooch ***** at the other, and we're right about in the middle.
Well, you see, this is the problem with terrorists. They're really inconsiderate when it comes to people's schedules.
What can I say? I'm a spy.
Women. Can't live with 'em. Can't kill 'em!
Well, he ain't so much a good guy as he is just a bad mother ******. I mean, he gets paid by people to **** guys up.
If there's one thing this last week has taught me, it's better to have a gun and not need it than to need a gun and not have it.
I haven't killed anybody since 1984. Goddamn his soul to burn for eternity in ******* **** for making me get my hands dirty. Go over to this comedian's son's apartment, come back with something that tells me where that ******* went, so I can wipe this egg off my face and finish this ******-up family for good.
I eat the *****, I eat the butt, I eat every motherfuckin' thang.
I mean look at her. It looks like she fell off the ugly tree and hit every branch on the way down.
I like you, Clarence. Always have. Always will.
You're an actor. Act, ************.
Sicilians are great liars. The best in the world. I'm Sicilian. My father was the world heavy-weight champion of Sicilian liars. From growing up with him I learned the pantomime. There are seventeen different things a guy can do when he lies to give himself away. A guys got seventeen pantomimes. A woman's got twenty, but a guy's got seventeen... but, if you know them, like you know your own face, they beat lie detectors all to ****. Now, what we got here is a little game of show and tell. You don't wanna show me nothin', but you're tellin me everything. I know you know where they are, so tell me before I do some damage you won't walk away from.
We now return to Bullit already in progress.
I'm gonna go jump in the tub and get all slippery and soapy and then hop in that waterbed and watch X-rated movies 'till you get your *** back in my lovn' arms.
You are a total nutcase, completely deranged, delusional, paranoid. Your thought process is all ****** up. Your information train is jammed, man!
Telephone call? Telephone call? That's communication with the outside world. Doctor's *discretion*. Nuh-uh. Look, hey - all of these nuts could just make phone calls, they could spread insanity, oozing through telephone cables, oozing into the ears of all these poor sane people, infecting them. Wackos everywhere, plague of madness.
All I see are dead people.
You had a bullet from World War I in your leg, James! How did it get there?
All the doors are locked too. Their protecting the people on the outside from us from the people on the outside who are as crazy as us.
Who cares what psychiatrists write on walls?
I'm looking for the Army of the Twelve Monkeys.
No one will surrender tonight, but I won't give in. I know what I want.
You know, your mood swings are kinda giving me whiplash.
Look at you, huh?... You're ALIVE!
Oh, still stubborn, aren't we? Is that what makes you so special to Edward?
I'd rather die than to stay away from you.
Whoa whoa! Chillax! No feature!
Ah... you brought a snack.
Beautiful. Very visually dynamic. I chose my stage well.
Floridians. That's whats in Jacksonville.
Edward, stop. Her blood is clean. You're killing her. Stop. Find the will.
Maybe he'll adopt me.
Death is peaceful - easy. Life is harder.
She's my cousin... but doesn't she look almost exactly like Laura Palmer?
Don't go there Laura! Don't go there!
Wow, Bob, Wow. Fire walk with me.
You know, there's only one problem with you: you're perfect.
You have to hide the diary, Harold. You made me write it all down. He doesn't know about you. You'll be safe.
If I had a nickel for every cigarette your mom smoked, I'd be dead.
You know, Agent Desmond, I figure this whole office, furniture included, is worth $27,000.
Diane, it is 4:20 PM. I'm standing on the bank of Wind River near the location of where the body of Teresa Banks was found. Diane, this case gives me a strange feeling. Not only has Special Agent Chester Desmond dissappeared without a trace, but this is one of Cole's blue rose cases. The clues that were found by Special Agent Desmond and Agent Stanley have led to dead ends. The letter that was extracted from beneath the fingernail of Teresa Banks gives me the feeling that the killer will strike again. But like the song goes, "who knows where, or when?"
The man behind the mask is looking for the book with the pages torn out. He is going towards the hiding place.
When this kind of fire starts, it is very hard to put out. The tender boughs of innocence burn first, and the wind rises, and then all goodness is in jeopardy.
Now, her name *is* Irene and it *is* night. Don't take it any further than that. There's nothin' good about it.
My name is Annie. I've been with Dale and Laura. The good Dale is in the lodge and can't leave. Write it in your diary.
Hey, slow pokes... Guess what? There's no tomorrow... Know why, baby? 'Cause it'll never get here.
Goddamn, these people are confusing.
It was a dream! We live inside a dream!
Nine's really late. We're really early.
Do you know who I am? I am the arm, and I sound like this...
I got another six hours to pay the money back and tell the Klane brothers that harassing a man who's already in the slammer is beneath even them.
The pavement was his enemy.
If you're lying to me, I'll be back!
I don't know what the problem is, but I'm sure it can be solved without resorting to violence.
Oh man... You better hold on to the coin you flipped. Because this game keeps up like this, I'm going to have to borrow it.
There's no such thing as too far. You understand? You push everything as far as you can. You push and you push and you push until it starts pushing back. And then you push some goddamn more. Remember that when you're with this guy today.
You've been a bad girl, Grace!
Your lies are old but you tell them pretty good.
Bye, Mister. Don't go nowhere without me. I wanna have your love child.
****. Gonna be another hot one today. Sometimes I don't even want to get out of bed. Course, I don't want to get out for the cold ones neither.
Come here. You know what I wanna do? I wanna hang drapes...
And a waitress named Flo.
Now you can ******' take it, or you can ******' leave it.
I bet right now, you don't know if you want to kill me... or **** me.
Is everyone in this town on drugs?
And here I made you all hot and sweaty...
It's the desert that makes you crazy. The loneliness out here. Nobody to talk to. People on the run.
It's not just a car. It's a sixty-four-and-a-half Mustang convertible.
Everything is everything. And everything is nothing, too.
I'm just going to shoot you once!
Do you see any Teletubbies in here? Do you see a slender plastic tag clipped to my shirt with my name printed on it? Do you see a little Asian child with a blank expression on his face sitting outside on a mechanical helicopter that shakes when you put quarters in it? No? Well, that's what you see at a toy store. And you must think you're in a toy store, because you're here shopping for an infant named Jeb.
They say this one has a surprise ending.
This is an art gallery, my friend, and this is a piece of art.
It appears that your baby has sustained some fractures while inside your uterus... his arms and his legs are broken.
You'd better not be back there jacking off to the Japanese comics, I swear to God...
I have something called Osteogenesis Imperfecta. It's a genetic disorder. I don't make a particular protein very well and it makes my bones very low in density... very easy to break.
And, to answer your question, there are two reasons why I'm looking at you like this. One because it seems in a few minutes you will officially be the only survivor of this train wreck, and two, because you didn't break one bone, you don't have a scratch on you.
I like you people, but you are sentimental *****! You fall in love with the poets; the poets fall in love with the Marxists; the Marxists fall in love with themselves. The country falls in love with the rhetoric, and in the end we are stuck with tyrants.
You better bury Ned right!... Better not cut up, nor otherwise harm no ******... or I'll come back and kill every one of you sons of *******.
Let the man out W.W. He's desiring to leave the hospitality of Big Whiskey behind him.
Now all you gotta do is pull the trigger mister.
Did Pa used to kill folks?
You been talking about that Queen of yours, again, Bob?  On Independence Day?
Any man don't wanna get killed better clear on out the back.
You know how women lie.
Now Ned, them ****** are going to tell different lies than you. And when their lies ain't the same as your lies... Well, I ain't gonna hurt no woman. But I'm gonna hurt you. And not gentle like before... but bad.
Just because we let them smelly fools ride us like horses don't mean we gotta let 'em brand us like horses. Maybe we ain't nothing but ****** but we, by god, we ain't horses.
I've killed women and children. I've killed everything that walks or crawls at one time or another. And I'm here to kill you, Little Bill, for what you done to Ned.
All right, I'm coming out. Any man I see out there, I'm gonna shoot him. Any sumbitch takes a shot at me, I'm not only gonna kill him, but I'm gonna kill his wife, all his friends, and burn his **** house down.
I suppose you know, Bob, if I ever see you again I'm just going to start shooting and figure it was self-defense.
Sorry, Mr. Fredricksen. You don't seem like a public menace to me. Take this.  The guys from Shady Oaks will be by to pick you up in the morning, okay?
You know him.  Charles Muntz, explorer. When I get big, I'm going where he's going,  South America. It's like America, but south.
You know Carl, these people who come here, they all tell pretty good stories.  A surveyor making a map...  A botanist cataloging plants...  An old man taking his house to Paradise Falls... and that's the best one yet. I can't wait to hear how it ends.
I will stop the dogs!  Stop you dogs!
This was her favorite candy bar. Because you sent her away, there's more for you.
I was hiding under your porch because I love you.
Whoa, that's s gonna be like a billion transfers to get back to my house...
Movietown News presents, "Spotlight on Adventure." What you are now witnessing is footage never before seen by civilized humanity: a lost world in South America. Lurking in the shadow of majestic Paradise Falls, it sports plants and animals undiscovered by science. Who would dare set foot on this inhospitable summit? Why, our subject today, Charles Muntz!
Any last words? Come on, spit it out!
The wilderness must be explored! CA-CA! RAAWWRR!
That might sound boring, but I think the boring stuff is the stuff I remember the most.
You in the suit! Yes, you! Take a bath, hippie!
Does anyone know WHERE THEY ARE?
This is pretty ******* ****.
Anybody who ever built an empire, or changed the world, sat where you are now. And it's *because* they sat there that they were able to do it.
You're so pretty. You're exactly what I want to look like in fifteen years.
No, I don't think of him that way; he's old.
All the things you probably hate about travelling -the recycled air, the artificial lighting, the digital juice dispensers, the cheap sushi- are warm reminders that I'm home
The stars will wheel forth from their daytime hiding places; and one of those lights, slightly brighter than the rest, will be my wingtip passing over.
Can you stop condescending for one second or is that one of the principles of your ******** philosophy?
Please, for the love of God, can I fire the next one.
I can't feel *anything* anymore!
Tell me... do you like music, Mr. Finch?
"The multiplying villainies of nature do swarm upon him  disdaining fortune/with his brandish'd steel, which smoked with bloody execution...?
England prevails because *I* say it does!
There are no coincidences, Delia... only the illusion of coincidence.
It seems strange that my life should end in such a terrible place, but for three years I had roses, and apologized to no one.
I'm a soldier, but in serving my country, I have betrayed my conscience.
I don't know what you're brewing up, and I don't want to know. But when the music stops, I'd be obliged if Keitel found himself without a chair.
I'm thinking of earlier times.
God promised Abraham that he would not destroy Sodom if he could find ten righteous men... I have a feeling that for Germany it may come down to one.
Every second we stand here is a second lost!
Hitler is dead. Operation Valkyrie is in effect.
My dreams are a cruel joke. They taunt me. Even in my dreams I'm an idiot... who knows he's about to wake up to reality. If I could only avoid sleep. But I can't. I try to tell myself what to dream. I try to dream that I am flying. Something free. It never works...
You will never know the exquisite pain of the guy, who goes home alone.
Don't you know that when you sleep with someone, your body makes a promise whether you do or not.
You'll be meeting Rebecca Dearborn, my personal role model.
Somebody died. It was me.
I'll tell you in another life, when we are both cats.
Forgive me, I'm blowing your mind.
You were missed, David. It was Sofia who never fully recovered. It was she who some how knew you best... and like you, she never forgot that one night where true love seemed possible.
Do you love me? I mean really love me. Because if you don't... I'll just have to kill you.
This is a revolution of the mind.
Don't ever say that word. I will never come over and bring you chicken soup and **** your brains out again.
I think she's the saddest girl to ever to hold a martini.
The little things... there's nothing bigger, is there?
Julie Gianni is your **** buddy?
Four times... it means something, David.
Doc, once you've been driven off a bridge at 80 miles an hour, somehow you don't invite happiness in without a full body search.
These? These are more than headaches. These are steel plates slicing through my every thought.
He's my son. He's very shy.
Every passing minute is another chance to turn it all around.
Relax, David. Open your eyes.
I want to live a real life... I don't want to dream any longer.
It's been a brilliant journey of self-awakening. And now you've simply got to ask yourself this: What is happiness to you, David?
Holy God. This is going to change my life in a zillion different ways. I must be nuts.
I good you bid evening.
Here I was born, and there I died. It was only a moment for you; you took no notice.
There's no way for them to understand. You and I know who killed Madeleine.
Scottie, do you believe that someone out of the past - someone dead - can enter and take possession of a living being?
Only one is a wanderer; two together are always going somewhere.
You want to know something? I don't think Mozart's going to help at all.
One final thing I have to do... and then I'll be free of the past.
Give me your hand. Give me your hand.
That's not the point, Adam. I mean, the room is covered in blow; Moore looks like he went at it with a ******' mountain lion; I mean, the room looks like the Manson family stayed here a month. This is a major thin-ice situation we got here.
I don't ******* know how to pray.
A simple vote. We've got two choices. One: we clean up this mess, right now, bury it out in the desert, go home, and never look back - or, we can easily call the police, roll the dice, take our chances, and pray to God that it's only Michael who falls.  Our choices are simple: desert - or police.
It is amazing what two people love chooses to unite. It follows no rules.
She's not going to squeeze my shirt like that, is she?
You are fearless in a way that I shall never know.
Yes, I have risked. I hope I am always able to risk everything for the just and right cause.
The moment I heard my daughter's vision had finally failed her, and that she'd forever be blind, I was sitting in that chair. I was so ashamed.
His will to live is very strong.
Sometimes we don't do things we want to do so that others won't know we want to do them.
My sister has found love... again.
Who'll pinch me to wake me up? Who will laugh at me when I fall? Whose breath will I listen for so that I may sleep? Whose hand will I hold so that I may walk?
Papa, I cannot see his color.
We are grateful for the time we have been given.
Good afternoon, Lucius. I wanted to... tell you something.  I love you, Lucius. I love you... like the day is long! I love you more than the sun and the moon together. And if you feel the same way, then we should not hide it any longer.  It's a gift, love is! We should be thankful! We should bellow it out with all the breath in our lungs! Thank you! Thank you!  THANK YOU!
I know why you denied my sister. When I was younger, you used to hold my arm when I walked. Then suddenly you stopped. One day, I even tripped in your presence and nearly fell. I was faking, of course, but still you did not hold me. Sometimes we don't do things we want to do so that others will not know we want to do them.
While officers gather evidence of the grisly crime scene, you can only ask yourselves, "What kind of lunatic would commit such unthinkable crimes?" The three adjectives which best describe this killer are sadistic, intelligent and dangerous.
All combat takes place at night, in the rain, and at the junction of four map segments.
We're not gonna have a war, we're gonna have the appearance of a war.
Why change horses in midstream?
I'm not gonna let this stand.
I grew up in this town, people used to walk tall in this town, they wouldn't have traded the mill for a crooked casino and they wouldn't have stood around while drugs were being sold to kids.
I guess that changes our relationship a bit, huh?
You know what my new favorite sound is going to be? The sound of you screaming like a *****!
You stabbed me with a potato peeler!
Yeah! Woooo! I just bagged the elephant!
I guess your Dad isn't on the Board of Directors of *that* company, is he?
I look at a hundred deals a day. I pick one.
I don't go to bed with no *****, and I don't wake up with no *****. That's how I live with myself. I don't know how you do it.
Sure went down the toilet with that ugly *****.
You gonna tell me the difference between this guy and that guy is luck?
Kid, you're on a roll. Enjoy it while it lasts, 'cause it never does.
The most valuable commodity I know of is information.
You're walking around blind without a cane, pal. A fool and his money are lucky enough to get together in the first place.
I don't know where you get your information, but I don't like it.
Sun-tzu: If your enemy is superior, evade him. If angry, irritate him. If equally matched, fight, and if not split and reevaluate.
Blue Horseshoe loves Anacott Steel.
I'm gonna make you rich, Bud Fox.
Life all comes down to a few moments. This is one of them.
The richest one percent of this country owns half our country's wealth, five trillion dollars. One third of that comes from hard work, two thirds comes from inheritance, interest on interest accumulating to widows and idiot sons and what I do, stock and real estate speculation. It's ********. You got ninety percent of the American public out there with little or no net worth. I create nothing. I own. We make the rules, pal. The news, war, peace, famine, upheaval, the price per paper clip. We pick that rabbit out of the hat while everybody sits out there wondering how the **** we did it. Now you're not naive enough to think we're living in a democracy, are you buddy? It's the free market. And you're a part of it. You've got that killer instinct. Stick around pal, I've still got a lot to teach you.
Man looks in the abyss, there's nothing staring back at him. At that moment, man finds his character. And that is what keeps him out of the abyss.
Well, you're only the President of the company. What the **** do you know, anyway?
We're all just one trade away from humility.
It's not always the most popular person who gets the job done.
You keep your eyes only on me, you understand? Don't look down. Don't look around me. I'm taking you to the car and you're gonna want to look around... but you're not going to, are you?
It's the same everywhere - once the tripods begin to move, no more news comes out of that area.
I want to sleep in my own bed. I got back problems.
Ray, I'm standing right next to you. Talk to me. What's going on?
When it's ready, my body will just push it out.
We're leaving this house in 60 seconds.
From the moment the invaders arrived, breathed our air, ate and drank, they were doomed. They were undone, destroyed, after all of man's weapons and devices had failed, by the tiniest creatures that God in his wisdom put upon this earth. By the toll of a billion deaths, man had earned his immunity, his right to survive among this planet's infinite organisms. And that right is ours against all challenges. For neither do men live nor die in vain.
No one would have believed in the early years of the 21st century that our world was being watched by intelligences greater than our own; that as men busied themselves about their various concerns, *they* observed and studied, the way a man with a microscope might scrutinize the creatures that swarm and multiply in a drop of water. With infinite complacency, men went to and fro about the globe, confident of our empire over this world. Yet across the gulf of space, intellects vast and cool and unsympathetic regarded our planet with envious eyes and slowly, and surely, drew their plans against us.
Take care of our kids.
Look at the ********* birds!
That is so weird. The wind is blowing *toward* the storm.
You and me? I don't think we're on the same page.
There's nothing living in that direction!
When I can walk, I'll run.
Mark my words; he'll be dead in less than a year.
You're gonna do great things, Franklin. This place has identity now, a purpose.
He wishes to use up his entire fortune to buy up that leper colony!
You know if we'd lost here in Vietnam, I think it might've driven us crazy. Y'know, as a country. But we didn't. Thanks to you.
Rorschach's Journal: October 12th, 1985. Tonight, a comedian died in New York.
A live human body and a deceased human body have the same number of particles. Structurally there's no difference.
Just a matter of time, I suppose.
We can do so much more. We can save this world... with the right leadership.
Hm. Never disposed of sewage with a toilet before. Obvious, really.
She blames me for her career, but what else would she have been? A housewife?
Justice is coming to all of us, no matter what the **** we do. You know, mankind's been trying to kill each other off since the beginning of time. Now, we finally have the power to finish the job. Ain't nothing gonna matter once those nukes start flying; we'll all be dust. And Ozymandias here will be the smartest man on the cinder.
Would you like a closer look?
Steak tartar? Ah, yes. Steak tartar.
I'm sorry, I was never very good at languages.
Raw meat. You do like raw meat?
If you **** in your pants, you only stay warm for so long.
Don't touch me. Get away from me! Get out! I said, get out!
Are we hoping the ghost is going to have to use the potty?
Norman, this isn't about you! Something is happening to me. And it's... it's not to get even, and it's not some warped bid for attention. Something is happening in our house, whether you like it or not!
Please. Think of Caitlin.
I didn't kill my wife.
Can we walk AND talk? Because, in case you live, I don't wanna be late.
Adversary? Surely you mean *adversary*, old boy?
My mind. Your mind. Where do they fit in? Do you see what i mean?
Sharon? Please, do me a favor. Just tell me truthfully, when was the last time you CHECKED MY CHILDREN?
Have you checked the children?
You didn't expect me to come down in my bathrobe, did you?
Well, I'd love to go into the subject of vertigo and everything but I wouldn't want you to go and **** your pants.
Nothing happens on this ship that I don't know about. She speaks to me in the night. So don't test me, not even a little.
You can't run from the wind. You trim your sails, face the music, and keep going.
I think I'm gonna choke on feel good.
If we don't have order, we have nothing. Where we go one, we go all.
What do I look like? A bank?
Mommy's going to the beauty parlor, darling, but I'm leaving you with your favorite friend, Roger. He's going to take very, very good care of you, because if he doesn't... HE'S GOING BACK TO THE SCIENCE LAB.
Roger, darling. I want you to know I love you. I've loved you more than any woman's ever loved a rabbit.
Here's to the pencil pushers. May they all get lead poisoning.
Is he always this funny, or only on days when he's wanted for murder?
Dabbling in watercolors, Eddie?
Keep it up, Eddie. You're killing 'em. You're slaying 'em! You're knocking 'em DEAD!
Work's been kinda slow since cartoons went to color. But I've still got it. Boo boo be do, boo.
Mr. Valiant?  I hope you're proud of yourself, and those pictures you took.
Those toenails dry yet, sweetheart? We got some dancin' to do.
Ya know, I sure do like a girl with nice **** like yours who talks tough and looks like she can **** like a bunny. Do you **** like that? Cause if ya do, I'll **** ya good. Like a big ol' jackrabbit bunny, jump all around that hole. Bobby Peru don't come up for air.
That ain't never will happen, baby. Least not in our lifetime.
My name's Bobby Peru, like the country.
This whole world's wild at heart and weird on top.
My mother would kill me if she knew I took the Rover!
Did Sam sell you up front on the idea of whacking Suzie?  That's murder, kid.
People aren't always what they appear to be. Don't forget that!
Can I play too? Or is it just for boys?
So you're the new chicken licker.
No little ***** could ever make me ***.
Never drum on a white lady's boobies at a big redneck dance. Got it.
We may not have a woodshed on board, but that boy is gonna get a whuppin' anyway!
We may have lost the war, but we haven't lost our sense of humor. Even when we lose a lung, a spleen, a bladder, thirty-five feet of small intestine, two legs, and our ability to reproduce all in the name of the south, do we EVER LOSE OUR SENSE OF HUMOR?
And you, West, not every situation calls for your patented approach of "shoot first, shoot later, shoot some more and then when everybody's dead try to ask a question or two."
Well now isn't this a coincidence? I'm out for a little morning ride and right in the middle of nowhere I bump into General Ulysses S. Grant himself!
That's it, no more Mr. Knife guy.
I was going to tell you everything eventually.
We're all very happy that you're going to live, John Book. We didn't know what we would do with you if you'd died.
You be careful out among them English.
What you take into your hand, you take into your heart.
4:30. Time for milking.
No offence, Professor Tripp, but you look kinda crappy.
Okay, James, I wish you hadn't shot my girlfriend's dog. Even though Poe and I weren't exactly what you'd call simpatico, that's no reason he should've taken two in the chest.
So. I guess we just divorce our spouses, marry each other, and have this baby, right? Simple.
You know, people like you are the reason I was afraid to go to school as a child.
Welcome to the future.
Don't you people ever die?
Nothing like fresh powder.
The name's Gibbons. Augustus Gibbons.
Why is it always the assholes who pass the test?
The things I'm gonna do for my country.
You can't audit life, my friend.
I can't believe I tripped like that.
You know, if I were you, I'd be a little nervous about firing somebody I'd just had an affair with, okay?
Yeah, this is the haute cuisine of garments.
Are you out of your mind? You know, I admit I may not be the best mother in the world, but I'm doing the best I know how, and he doesn't need you to rub his face in **** because you think it's good for him! He's gonna find out that the world is a horrible place and that people suck soon enough and without any help from you!
Once I read a story about a butterfly in the subway, and today, I saw one! It got on at 42nd and off at 59th, where, I assume, it was going to Bloomingdales to buy a hat that will turn out to be a mistake, as almost all hats are.
I always take a relationship to the next level. If that works out, I take it to the next level after that, until I finally reach that level when it becomes absolutely necessary for me to leave.
Well, as far as I'm concerned, the Internet is just another way of being rejected by women.
Kiss me, I'm going to be your wicked step mother.
The Godfather is the I-ching. The Godfather is the sum of all wisdom. The Godfather is the answer to any question. What should I pack for my summer vacation? "Leave the gun, take the cannoli." What day of the week is it? "Monday, Tuesday, Thursday, Wednesday."
I better go deliver this. I have a very thirsty date. She's part camel.
I like Patricia. I *love* Patricia. Patricia makes COFFEE nervous.
Don't you just love New York in the fall?
You poor, sad, multimillionaire. I feel so sorry for you.
Save The Shop Around the Corner and you will save your soul.
Oh, no, she's beautiful, but she's a pill.
}: I hear nothing, not even a sound on the streets of New York. Just the beat of my own heart. I have mail - from you.
Kevin, this is possibly the most adorable creature I've ever been in contact with, and if she turns out to be as good looking as a mailbox... I would be crazy enough to turn my life upside down and marry her.
My father's getting married again. For the past five years he's been living with a woman named Gillian, who studied decorating at Caesar's Palace.
Sometimes I wonder about my life. I lead a small life - well, valuable, but small - and sometimes I wonder, do I do it because I like it, or because I haven't been brave? So much of what I see reminds me of something I read in a book, when shouldn't it be the other way around? I don't really want an answer. I just want to send this cosmic question out into the void. So good night, dear void.
Two ***** lookin' switches over there, but I'm not going to be the first.
My grandfather... was a very... SICK... man.
You're gonna' have a great time with her tonight. Just be yourself... mostly.
That's the thing about the truth. It'll set you free, but first it'll really **** you off!
Oh no! Come all this bloody way to get shot by a bullet from Birmingham? Shoot straight you ********!
Well fought, Gentlemen. It's time to save the Colours. Get to Rorke's Drift. You must warn them.
Excuse me, my Lord, there's something I must convey to you. I rode along the track down to Rorke's Drift. The sky above is red with fire. Your orders My Lord? Do we move to the Drift?
